82 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
At such a time I found out for certain that this bleak place
overgrown with nettles was the church-yard ; and that Tobias
Pirrip, late of this Parish, and also Georgiana, wife of the
above, were dead and buried; and that Alexander, Barthol
omew, Abraham, George, and Robert, infant children of the
aforesaid, were also dead and buried ; and that the dark, flat
wilderness beyond the church-yard, intersected with dikes and
mounds and gates, with scattered cattle feeding on it, was the
marshes ; and that the low leaden line beyond was the river ;
and that the distant-savage lair from which the wind was rush
ing, was the sea ; and that the small bundle of shivers growing
afraid of it all and beginning to cry, was Pip.
" Hold your noise 1" cried a terrible voice, as a man started
up from among the graves at the side of the church-porch.
" Hold your noise, you little devil, or I'll cut your throat 1"
A fearful man, all in gray, with a great iron on his leg. A
man with no hat, and broken shoes, and with an old rag tied
round his head. A man who had been soaked in water and
smothered in mud, and lamed by stones, and cut by flints, and
stung by nettles, and torn by briers ; who limped, and shivered,
and glared, and growled ; and whose teeth chattered in his
head as he seized me by the chin.
"Don't cut my throat, Sir 1" I pleaded in terror. "Pray
don't do it, Sir 1"
" Tell us your name 1" said the man. " Quick 1"
"Pip, Sir."
" Once more," said the man. " Give it mouth 1"
"Pip. Pip, Sir."
"Show us where you live," said the man. "Pint out the
place 1"
I pointed to where our village lay on the flat in-shore among
the alder-trees and pollards, a mile or more from the church.
The man, after looking at me for a moment, turned me up
side-down, and emptied my pockets. There was nothing in
them but a piece of bread. When the church came to itself'—
for he was so sudden and strong that he made it go head over
heels before me, and I saw the steeple under my legs—when
the church came to itself, I say, I was seated on a high tomb
stone trembling, while he ate the bread ravenously.
 

GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 23
"You young dog!" said the man, licking his lips at me,
" what fat cheeks you ha' got !"
I believe they were fat, though I was at that time undersized
for my years, and not strong.
" Damned if I couldn't eat 'em," said the man, with a threat
ening shake of his head, " and if I han't half a mind to 't !"
I earnestly expressed my hope th- he wouldn't, and held
tighter to the tombstone on which ht- ad put me ; partly to
keep myself upon it, partly to keep myself from crying.
" Now then, lookie here 1" said the man. " Where's your
mother ?"
"There, Sir!" said I.
He started, made a short run, and stopped and looked over
his shoulder.
" There, Sir 1" I timidly explained. " Also Gegiorana.
That's my mother."
" Oho 1" said he, coming back. " And is that your father
alonger your mother ?"
" Yes, Sir," said I ; " him too ; late of this parish."
" Ha 1" he muttered then, considering. " Who d'ye live with
—supposin' you're kindly let to live, which I han't made up my
mind about ?"
"My sister, Sir—Mrs. Joe Gargery—wife of Joe Gargery,
the blacksmith, Sir."
"Blacksmith, eh ?" said he. And looked down at his leg.
After darkly looking at his leg and at me several times, he
came closer to my tombstone, took me by both arms, and tilted
me back as far as he could hold me ; so that his eyes looked
most powerfully down into mine, and mine looked most help
lessly up into his.
" Now lookie here," he said, " the ipjestion being whether
you're to be let to live. You know what a file is ?"
"Yes, Sir."
"And you know what wittles is ?"
"Yes, Sir."
After each question he tilted me over a little more, so as to
give me a greater sense of helplessness and danger.
"You get me a file." He tilted me again. "And you get
me wittles." He tilted me again. " You bring 'em both to me."
24 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
He tilted me again. " Or I'll have your heart and liver out."
He tilted me again.
I was dreadfully frightened, and so giddy that I clung to
him with both hands, and said, "If you would kindly please
to let me keep upright, Sir, perhaps I shouldn't be sick, and
perhaps I could attend more."
He gave me a most tremendous dip and roll, so that the
church jumped over its own weathercock. Then he held me
by the arms, in an upright position on the top of the stone, and
went on in these fearful terms :
"You bring me, to-morrow morning early, that file, and them
wittles. You bring the lot to me at that old Battery over
yonder. You do this, and you never dare to say a word, or
dare to make a sign concerning your haven't seen such a person
as me, or any person, and you shall be let to live. You fail,
or you go from my words in any partickler, no matter how small
the partickler, and your heart and your liver shall be tore out,
roasted, and ate. Now I ain't alone, as you may think I am.
There's a young man hid with me, in comparison with which
young man I am a Angel o' light. That young man hears the
words I speak. That young man has a secret way pecooliar to
himself, of getting at a boy, and at his heart, and at his liver.
It is in wain for a boy to attempt to hide himself from that
young man. A boy may lock his door, may be warm in bed,
may tuck himself up, may draw the clothes over his head, may
think himself comfortable and safe ; but that young man will
softly creep and creep his way to him and tear him open. I am
a keepin' that young man from harmin' of you at the present
moment, with great difficulty. I find it very hard to hold that
young man off of your inside. Now, what do you say?"
I said that I would get him the file, and I would get him
what broken bits of food I could, and I would come to him
at the Battery, early in the morning.
" Say Lord strike you dead if you don't ?" said the man.
I said so, and he took me down.
"Now," he pursued, "you remember what you've under
took, and you remember that young man, and you get
home !" " Goo-good-night, Sir," I faltered.
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 2.0
" Much of that !" said he, glancing about him over the cold
wet flat. " I wish I was a frog. Or a eel 1"
At the same time he hugged his shuddering body in both
his arms—clasping himself, as if to hold himself together—
and limped toward the low church wall. As I saw him go,
picking his way among the nettles, and among the brambles
that bound the evergreen mounds, he looked in my young eyes,
as if he were eluding the hands of the dead people, stretching
up cautiously out of their graves, to get a twist upon his ankle
and pull him in.
When he came to the low church wall, he got over it, like a
man whose legs were numbed and stiff, and then turned round
to look for me. When I saw him turning, I set my face toward
home, and made the best use of my legs. But presently I
looked over my shoulder, and saw him going on again toward
the river, still hugging himself in both arms, and picking his
way with his sore feet among the great stones dropped into the
marshes here and there, for stepping-places when the rains were
heavy, or the tide was in.
The marshes were just a long black horizontal line then, as
I stopped to look after him ; and the river was just another
horizontal line not nearly so broad nor yet so black ; and the
sky was just a row of long angry red lines, and dense black lines
intermixed. On the edge of the river I could faintly make out
the only two black things in all the prospect that seemed to
be standing upright ; one of these was the beacon by which the
sailors steered—-like an unhooped cask upon a pole—an ugly
slimy thing when you were near it; the other, a gibbet with
some chains hanging to it which had once held a pirate. The
man was limping on toward this latter, as if he were the pirate
coming to life and come down, and goin>; back to hook himself
up again. It gave me a terrible turn when I thought so ; and
as I saw the black cattle lifting their heads to gaze after him,
I wondered whether they thought so too. I looked all around
for the horrible young man, and could see no signs of him.
But now I was frightened again, and ran home without stop
ping.
CHAPTER II.
My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, was more than twenty years
older than I, and had established a great reputation with her
self and the neighbors because she had brought me up "by
hand." Having at that time to find out for myself what the
expression meant, and knowing her to have a hard and heavy
hand, and to be much in the habit of laying it upon her hus
band, as well as upon me, I supposed that Joe Gargery and
I were both brought up by hand. She was not a good-looking woman, my sister ; and I had a
general impression that she must have made Joe Gargery
marry her by hand. Joe was a fair man, with curls of flaxen
hair on each side of his smooth face, and eyes of such a very
undecided blue that they seemed to have somehow got mixed
with their own whites. He was a mild, good-natured, sweettempered,
easy-going, foolish, dear fellow—a sort of Hercules
in strength, and also in weakness.
My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes, had such a
prevailing redness of skin that I sometimes used to wonder
whether it was possible she washed herself with a nutmeggrater
instead of soap. She was tall and bony, and almost
always wore a coarse apron, fastened over her figure behind
with two loops, and having a square, impregnable bit in front
that was stuck full of pins and needles. She made it a powerful
merit in herself, and a strong reproach against Joe, that she
wore this apron so much. Though I really see no reason now
why she should have worn it at all ; or why, if she did wear it
at all, she should not have taken it off every day of her life.
Joe's forge adjoined our house, which was a wooden house,
as many of the dwellings in our country were—most of them,
at that time. When I ran home from the church-yard, the
forge was shot up, and Joe was fitting alone in the kitchen.
(26)
GREAT EXPECTATIONS -27
Joe and I being fellow-sufferers, and having confidence as such,
Joe imparted a confidence to me the moment I raised the latch
of the door and peeped in at him opposite to it, sitting in the
chimney-corner.
" Mrs. Joe has been out a dozen times, looking for you, Pip;
and she's out now, making it a baker's dozen."
" Is she ?"
" Yes, Pip," said Joe ; " and what's worse, she's got Tickler
with her."
At this dismal intelligence I twisted the only button on my
waistcoat round and round, and looked in great depression at
the fire. Tickler was a wax-ended piece of cane, worn
smooth by collision with my tickled frame.
"She sat down," said Joe, "and she got up, and she made
a grab at Tickler, and she ram-paged out. That's what she
did," said Joe, slowly clearing the fire between the bars with
the poker; "she ram-paged out, Pip."
" Has she been gone long, Joe ?" I always treated him as
a larger species of child, and as no more than my equal.
" Well," said Joe, looking up at the Dutch clock, " she's been
on the Ram-page, this last spell, about five minutes, Pip. She's
a coming 1 Get behind the door, old chap, and have the jacktowel
betwixt you."
I took the advice. My sister, Mrs. Joe, throwing the door
wide open, and finding an obstruction behind it, immediately
divined the cause, and applied Tickler to further investiga
tion. She concluded by showing me. I often served her as
a connubial missile at Joe, who, glad to get hold of me on
any terms, passed me on into the chimney and quietly fenced
me there with his great legs.
"Where have you been, you young monkey?" said Mrs.
Joe, stamping her foot. " Tell me directly what you've been
doing to wear me away with fret and fright and worrit, or I'd
have you out of that corner if you was fifty Pips and he was
five hundred Gargerys."
" I have only been to the church-yard," said I, from my stool,
crying and rubbing myself.
" Church-yard 1" repeated my sister. " If it warn't for me
-28 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
you'd have been to the church-yard long ago, and staid there.
Who brought you up by hand ?"
"You did," said I.
"And why did I do it, I should like to know 1" exclaimed
my sister.
I whimpered, "I don't know."
" I don't 1" said my sister. " I'd never do it again 1 I know
that. I may truly say I've never had this apron of mine off
since born you were. It's bad enough to be a blacksmith's
wife (and him a Gargery), without being your mother."
My thoughts strayed from that question as I looked discon
solately at the fire. For the fugitive out on the marshes with
the ironed leg, the mysterious young man, the file, the victuals,
and the dreadful pledge I was under to commit a larceny on
those sheltering premises, rose before me in the avenging coals.
" Hah 1" said Mrs. Joe, restoring Tickler to his station.
" Church-yard, indeed 1 You may well say church-yard, you
two." One of us, by-the-by, had not said it at all. "You'll
drive me to the church-yard betwixt you one of these days, and
oh, a- pr-r-recious pair you'd be without me!"
As she applied herself to set the tea-things, Joe peeped
down at me over his leg, as if he were mentally casting me and
himself up, and calculating what kind of pair we practically
should make, under the grievous circumstances foreshadowed.
After that, he sat feeling his right-side flaxen curls and
whisker, and following Mrs. Joe about with his blue eyes, as his
manner always was at squally times.
My sister had a trenchant way of cutting our bread-andbutter
for us, that never varied. First, with her left hand she
held the loaf, hard and fast, against her bib—where it some
times got a pin into it, and sometimes a needle, which we after
ward got into our mouths. Then she took some butter (not
too much) on a knife and spread it on the loaf in an apothecary
kind of way, as if she were making a plaster—using both sides
of the knife with a slapping dexterity, and trimming and
moulding the butter off round the crust. Then she gave the
knife a final smart wipe on the edge of the plaster, and then
sawed a very thick round off the loaf, which she finally, before
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 29
separating from the loaf, hewed into two halves : of which Joe
got one, and I the other.
On the present occasion, though I was hungry, I dared
not eat my slice. I felt that I must have something in reserve
for my dreadful acquaintance and his ally, the still more
dreadful young man. I knew Mrs. Joe's housekeeping to be
of the strictest kind, and that my larcenous researches in the
dead of night might find nothing available in the safe, there
fore I resolved to put my hunk of bread-and-butter down
the leg of my trowsers.
The effort of resolution necessary to the achievement of this
purpose I found to be quite awful. It was as if I had to
make up my mind to leap from the top of a high house, or
plunge into a great depth of water. And it was made the
more difficult by the unconscious Joe. In our above-mentioned
freemasonry as fellow-sufferers, and in his good-natured com
panionship with me, it was our evening habit to compare
the way we bit through our slices by silently holding them
up to each other's admiration now and then—which in general
led us to new exertions. To-night Joe several times invited
me, by the display of his fast-diminishing slice, to enter
upon our usual friendly competition ; but he found me each
time with my yellow mug of tea on one knee, and my untouched
bread-and-butter on the other. At last, I desperately con
sidered that the thing I contemplated must be done, and that
it had best be done in the least improbable manner consistent
with the circumstances. I took advantage of a moment
when Joe had just looked aside, and got my bread-andbutter
down my leg.
Joe was evidently made uncomfortable by what he supposed
to be my loss of appetite, and took a thoughtful semicircular
bite out of his slice, which he didn't seem to enjoy. He rolled
it about in his mouth much longer than usual, pondering over
it a good deal, and after all gulped it down like a pill. He
was about to take another bite, and had just got his head on
one side for a good purchase on it, when his eye fell on me,
and he saw that my bread-and-butter was gone.
The wonder and consternation with which Joe stopped on
30 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
the threshold of his bite and stared at me were too evident
to escape my sister's observation.
" What's the matter now ?" said she smartly, as she put
down her cup.
"I say, you know 1" muttered Joe, shaking his head at me
in very serious remonstrances, "Pip, old chap 1 You'll do
yourself a mischief. It'll stick somewhere. You can't have
chawed it, Pip."
" What's the matter now ?" repeated my sister, more sharply
than before.
" If you can cough any trifle on it up, Pip, I'd recommend
you to do it," said Joe, all aghast. " Manners is manners,
but still yourelth's your elth."
By this time my sister was quite desperate, so she pounced
on Joe, and taking him by the two whiskers, knocked his head
for a little while against the wall behind him : while I sat
in the corner looking guiltily on.
"Now, perhaps you'll mention what's the matter," said my
sister, out of breath, " you staring great stuck pig."
Joe looked at her in a helpless way ; then took a helpless
bite and looked at mfe again.
" You know, Pip," said Joe, solemnly, with his last bite in
his cheek, and speaking in a confidential tone, as if we were
quite alone, "you and me is always friends, and I'd be the
last to tell upon you any time. But such a"—he moved his
chair and looked about the floor between us, and then again
at me—"such a honcommon Bolt as that !"
" Been bolting his food, has he ?" cried my sister.
"You know, old chap," said Joe, looking at me, and not
Mrs. Joe, with his bite still in his cheek, " I Bolted, myself,
when I was your age—frequent—and as a boy I've been
among a many Bolters ; but I never see your equal yet,
Pip, and it's a mercy you ain't choked dead."
My sister made a dive at me, and fished me up by the hair :
saying nothing more than the awful words, "you come along
and be dosed."
Some medical beast had revived Tar-water in those days as
a fine medicine, and Mrs. Joe always kept a supply of it in
the cupboard ; having a belief in its virtues correspondent to
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 31
its horrible nastiness. At the best of times so much of this
elixir was administered to me as a choice restorative, that I
was conscious of going about, smelling like a new fence. On
this particular evening the urgency of my case demanded a
pint of this mixture, which was poured down my throat, for
my greater comfort, while Mrs. Joe held my head under her
arm as a boot would be held in a boot-jack. Joe got off with
half-a-pint ; but was made to take that (much to his disturbance,
as he sat slowly biting and meditating before the fire),
"because he had had a turn." Judging for myself, I should
say he certainly had one afterward, if he had had none before.
Conscience is a dreadful thing when it accuses man or boy ;
but when, in the case of a boy, that secret burden co-operates
with another secret burden down the leg of his trowsers, it is
(as I can testify) a great punishment. The guilty knowledge
that I was going to rob Mrs. Joe—I .never thought I was
going to rob Joe, for I never thought of any of the house
keeping property as his—united to the necessity of always
keeping one hand on the bread-and-butter as I sat, or when
I was ordered about the kitchen on any small errand, almost
drove me out of my mind. Then, as the March winds
made the fire glow and flare, I thought I heard the fierce
voice outside of the man with the iron on his leg who had
sworn me to secrecy, declaring that he couldn't and wouldn't
starve until to-morrow, but must be fed now. At other times,
I thought, what if the young man who was with so much
difficulty restrained from imbruing his hands in me, should
either yield to his constitutional impatience, or should mistake
the time, and should think himself accredited to my heart and
liver to-night, instead of to-morrow 1 If ever any body's
hair stood on end with terror, mine must have done so then.
But, perhaps, nobody's ever did ?
It was Christmas eve, and I had to stir the pudding for next
day, with the copper-stick, from seven to eight by the Dutch
clock. I tried it with the load upon my leg (and that made
me think afresh of the man with the iron on his leg), and
found the tendency of exercise to bring the bread-and-butter
out at my ancle, quite unmanageable and unconquerable.
32 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
Happily I slipped away, and deposited that part of my con
science in my garret bedroom.
" Hark 1" said I, when I had done my stirring, and was
taking a final warm in the chimney corner before being sent
up to bed ; " was that guns, Joe ?"
" Ah 1" said Joe. " There's another conwict off."
" What does that mean, Joe ?" said I.
Mrs. Joe, who always took explanations upon herself, said,
snappishly, " Escaped. Escaped." Administering the defini
tion like Tar-water.
While Mrs. Joe sat with her head bending over her needle
work, I put my mouth into the forms of saying to Joe,
" What's a convict ?" Joe put his mouth into the forms of
returning such a highly elaborate answer, that I could make
out nothing of it but the single word "Pip."
" There was one off last night," said Joe, aloud, " after
sunset-gun. And they fired warning of him. And now, it
appears, they're firing warning of another."
" Who's firing ?" said I.
" Drat that child," interposed my sister, frowning at me
over her work, " what a questioner he is. Ask no questions,
and you'll be told no lies."
It was not very polite to herself, I thought, to imply that
I should be told lies by her, even if I did ask questions. But
she never was polite, unless there was company.
At this point Joe greatly augmented my curiosity by taking
the utmost pains to open his mouth very wide, and put it into
the form of a word that looked to me like " sulks." There
fore I naturally pointed to Mrs. Joe, and put my mouth into
the form of saying "her?" But Joe wouldn't hear of that at
all and again opened his mouth very wide, and shook the form
of a most emphatic word out of it. But I could make nothing
of the word.
"Mrs. Joe," said I, as a last resource, "I should like to
know—if you wouldn't much mind—where the firing comes
from ?"
" Lord bless the boy 1" exclaimed my sister, as if she didn't
quite mean that, but rather the contrary. " From the Hulks."
" Oh-ho 1" said I, looking at Joe. " Hulks 1"
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 33
Joe gave a reproachful cough, as much as to say, " Well, I
told you so."
'- And please what's Hulks ?" said I.
"That's the way with this boy 1" exclaimed my sister, point
ing me out with her needle and thread, and shaking her head.
" Answer him one question, and he'll ask you a dozen directly.
Hulks are prison-ships, right 'cross th' meshes." We always
used that name for marshes, in our country.
" I wonder who's put into prison-ships, and why they're
put there ?" said I, in a general way, and with desperation.
It was too much for Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose. "I
tell you what, young man," said she, " I didn't bring you up
by hand to badger people's lives out. It would be blame to
me, and not praise, if I had. People are put in the Hulks
because they murder, and because they rob, and do all sorts
of bad; and they almost always begin by asking questions.
Now you get along to bed I"
I was never allowed a candle to light me to bed, and, as I
went up stairs in the dark, with my head tingling from Mrs.
Joe's thimble, having played the tambourine upon it to ac
company her last words, I felt fearfully sensible of the great
convenience that the Hulks were handy for me. I was clearly
on my way there. I had begun by asking questions, and I was
going to rob Mrs. Joe.
Since that time, which is far enough away now, I have
often thought that few people know what secrecy there is in
the young, under terror. No matter how unreasonable the
terror, so that it be terror. I was in mortal terror of the
young man who wanted my heart and liver ; I was in mortal
terror of my interlocutor with the ironed leg ; I was in mortal
terror of myself, from whom an awful promise had been ex
tracted ; I had no hope of deliverance through my all-powerful
sister, who repulsed me at every turn ; I am afraid to think,
even now, of what I might have done, upon requirement, in
the secrecy of my terror.
If I slept at all that night, it was only to imagine myself
drifting down the river on a strong spring tide to the Hulks ;
a ghostly pirate calling out to me through a speaking trumpet,
as I passed the gibbet-station, that I had better come ashore,
2
84 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
and be hanged there at once, and not put it off. I was afraid
to sleep, even if I had been inclined, for I knew that at the
first faint dawn of morning I must rob the pantry. There was
no getting a light by easy friction then ; to have got one I
must have struck it out of flint and steel, and have made a
noise like the very pirate himself rattling his chains.
As soon as the great black velvet pall outside my little
window was shot with gray, I got up and went down stairs :
every board upon the way, and every crack in every board,
calling after me "Stop thief 1" and "Get up, Mrs. Joe!" In
the pantry, which was far more abundantly supplied than
usual, owing to the season, I was very much alarmed by a
hare hanging up by the heels, whom I rather thought I caught,
when my back was half turned, waking. I had no time for
verification, no time for selection, no time for any thing, for I
had no time to spare. I stole some bread, some rind of cheese,
about half ajar of mince-meat (which I tied up in my pockethandkerchief
with my last night's slice), some brandy from a
stone bottle (which I decanted into a glass bottle I had secretly
used for making that intoxicating fluid, Spanish-liquoricewater,
up in my room : diluting the stone bo.ttle from a jug
in the kitchen cupboard), a meat bone with very little on it,
and a beautiful round, compact pork-pie. I was nearly going
away without the pie, but I was tempted to mount upon a
shelf to look what it was that was put away so carefully in a
covered earthenware dish in a corner, and I found it was the
pie, and I took it in the hope that it was not intended for
early use, and would not be missed for some time.
There was a door in the kitchen communicating with the
forge ; I unlocked and unbolted that door, and got a file from
among Joe's tools. Then I put the fastenings as I had found
them, opened the door at which I had entered when I ran
home last night, shut it, and ran for the misty marshes.
CHAPTER III.
It was a rimy morning, and very damp. I had seen the
damp lying on the outside of my little window, as if some
goblin had been crying there all night, and using the window
for a pocket-handkerchief. Now I saw the damp lying on the
bare hedges and spare grass, like a coarser sort of spiders'
webs ; hanging itself from twig to twig and blade to blade.
On every rail and gate wet lay clammy ; and the marsh mist
was so thick that the wooden finger on the post, directing
people to our village —a direction which they never accepted,
for they never came there—was invisible to me until I was quite
close under it. Then, as I looked up at it, while it dripped,
it seemed, to my oppressed conscience like a phantom devot
ing me to the Hulks.
The mist was heavier yet when I got out upon the marshes,
so that, instead of my running at every thing, every thing
seemed to run at me. This was very disagreeable to a quiet
mind. The gates and dikes and banks came bursting at me
through the mist, as if they cried as plainly as could be, "A
boy with a pork-pie 1 Stop him 1" The black cattle came
upon me with like suddenness, staring out of their eyes, and
smoking out of their nostrils, "Halloa, young thief 1" One
black ox, with a white cravat on—who had to my awakened
conscience something of a clerical air—fixed me so steadily
with his eyes, and moved his blunt head round in such an ac
cusatory manner as I moved round, that I called out to him,
" I couldn't help it ! It wasn't for myself I took it I" Upon
which he put down his head, blew a cloud of smoke out of his
nose, and vanished with a kick-up of his hind leg and flourish
of his tail.
All this time I was getting on toward the river ; but how
ever fast I went; I couldn't warm my feet, to which the damp
<35)
M GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
cold seemed riveted, as the iron was riveted to the leg of the
man I was running to meet. I knew my way to the Battery
pretty straight, for I had been down there on a Sunday with
Joe, and Joe had, sitting on an old gun, told me that when I
was 'prentice to him regularly bound, we would have such
I,arks there as should recompense us for our constraint at
home. However, in the confusion of the mist, I found myself
at last too far to the right, and consequently had to try back
along the river-side, on the bank of loose stones above the
mud and the stakes that staked the tide out, to come at the
Battery. Making my way along here with all dispatch, I had
just crossed a ditch which I knew to be very near the Battery,
and had just scrambled up the mound beyond the ditch, when
I saw the man sitting before me. His back was toward me,
and he had got his arms folded, and was nodding forward
heavy with sleep. I thought he would be more glad if I came upon him with
his breakfast in that unexpected manner, so I went forward
softly and touched him on the shoulder. He instantly jumped
up, and it was not the man, but another man 1
And yet he was dressed in coarse gray, too, and had a
great iron on his leg, and was lame, and hoarse, and cold, and
was every thing that the other man was ; except that he had
not the same face, and had a flat, broad-brimmed, low-crowned
felt hat on. All this I saw in a moment, for I had only a
moment to see it in ; he swore an oath at me, made a hit
at me—it was a round weak blow that missed me and almost
knocked himself down, for it made him stumble—and then
he ran into the mist, tumbling twice as he went, and I lost
him." It's the young man 1" I thought. I felt my heart shoot as
I identified him ; and I dare say I should have felt a pain in my
liver, too, if I had known where it was.
I was soon at the Battery after that, and there was the man
—hugging himself and limping to and fro, as if he had never
all night left off hugging and limping—waiting for me. He
was awfully cold, to be sure. I half expected to see him drop
down before my face and die of cold. His eyes looked so
awfully hungry, too, that when I handed him the file it occurred
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 37
to me he would have tried to eat it, if he had not seen my
bundle. He did not turn me upside down, this time, to get
at what I had, but left me right side upward while I opened
the bundle and emptied my pockets.
" What's in the bottle, boy ?" said he.
" Brandy," said I.
He was already handing mince-meat down his throat in
the most curious manner, more like a man who was putting
it away somewhere in a violent hurry than a man who was
eating it—but he left off to take some of the liquor, shivering
all the while so violently that it was quite as much as he could
do to keep the neck of the bottle between his teeth.
" I think you have got the ague," said I.
" I'm much of your opinion, boy," said he.
"It's bad about here. You've been lying out on the ->
meshes, and they're dreadful aguish. Rheumatic, too."
" I'll eat my breakfast afore they're the death of me,"
said he. " I'd do that, if I was going to be strung up to that
there gallows as there is over there directly arterward. I'll
beat the shivers so far, I'll bet you a guinea."
He was gobbling mince-meat, meat, bone, bread, cheese,
and pork-pie all at once : staring distrustfully while he did so
at the mist all round us, and often stopping—even stopping
his jaws—to listen. Some real or fancied sound, some clink
upon the river or breathing of beasts upon the marsh, now
gave him a start, and he said, suddenly :
"You're not a false imp? You brought no one with
you ?"
"No, sir! No!"
" Nor give no one the office to follow you ?"
"No!" " Well," said he, " I believe you. You'd be but a fierce
young hound indeed, if at your time of life you could
help to hunt a wretched warmint, hunted as near death and
dunghill as this poor wretched warmint is 1"
Something clicked in his throat, as if he had works in him
like a clock, and was going to strike. And he smeared his
ragged, rough sleeve over his eyes.
Pitying his desolation, and watching him as he gradually
38 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
settled down upon the pie, I made bold to say, " I am glad you
enjoy it."
" Did you speak ? "
" I said I was glad you enjoyed it."
"Thankee, my boy. I do."
I had often watched a large dog of ours eating his food ; and
I now noticed a decided similarity between the dog's way of
eating and the man's. The man took strong, sharp, sudden
bites, just like the dog. He swallowed, or rather snapped
up, every mouthful too soon and too fast ; and he looked side
ways here and there while he ate, as if he thought there was
danger of somebody's coming to take the pie away. He was
altogether too unsettled in his mind over it to appreciate it
comfortably, I thought, or to have any body to dine with him,
without making a chop with his jaws at the visitor. In all
of which particulars he was very like the dog.
"You won't leave any of it for him," said I, timidly, after
a silence during which I had hesitated as to the politeness of
making the remark. " There's no more to be got where that
came from." It was the certainty of this fact that impelled me
to offer the hint.
" Leave for him ? Who's him?" said my friend, stopping in
his crunching of pie-crust.
" The young man. That you spoke of. That was hid with
you."
" Oh, ah 1" he returned, with something like a gruff laugh.
"Him? Yes, yes 1 He don't want no wittles."
" I thought he looked as if he did," said I.
The man stopped eating, and regarded me with the closest
scrutiny and the greatest surprise.
" Looked ? When ?"
" Just now 1"
" Where ?"
" Yonder," said I, pointing ; " over there, where I found
him nodding asleep, and thought it was you."
He held me by the collar and stared at me so, that I began
to think his first idea about cutting my throat had revived.
" Dressed like you, you know, only with a hat," I explained,
trembling; "and—and"—I was very anxious to put it delicately
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 39
—"and with—the same reason for wanting to borrow a file
Didn't you hear the gun last night?"
" Then there was firing 1" he said to himself.
" I wonder you shouldn't have been sure of that," I returned,
"for we heard it up at home, and that's further away, and we
were shut in besides."
"Why, see now 1" said he. "When a man's alone on these
flats, with a light head and a light stomach, perishin' of cold
and want, he hears nothin' all night but guns firin', and voices
callin'. Hears ? He sees the soldiers with their red coats,
lij-hted up by the torches carried afore, closin' in round
him. Hears his number called, hears himself challenged, hears
the rattle of the muskets, hears the orders, ' Make ready 1
Present ! —Cover him steady, men 1' and is laid hands on, and
there's nothing 1 Why, if I see one pursuing party last night
—coming up in order, Damn 'em, with their tramp, tramp—
I see a hundred. And as to firin' 1 Why, I see the mist
shake with the cannon, when it was broad day. —But this man"
—he had said all the rest as if he had forgotten my being
there—''did you notice any thing in him ?"
" He had a bruised face," said I, recalling what I hardly
knew I knew.
" Not here ?" exclaimed the man, striking his left cheek
with the flat of his hand.
"Yes! There 1"
" Where is he ?" He crammed what little food was left into
the breast of his gray jacket. " Show me the way he went.
I'll pull him down like a blood-hound. Curse this iron on my
sore leg 1 Give us hold of the file, boy."
I indicated in what direction. The mist had shrouded the
other man, and he looked up at it for an instant. But he was
down on the rank wet grass, filing at his iron like a madman,
and not minding me or minding his own leg, which had an old
chafe upon it and was bloody, but which he handled as roughly
as if it had no more feeling in it than the file. I was very
much afraid of him again, now that he had worked himself into
this fierce hurry, and I was likewise very much afraid of keeping
away from home any longer. I told him I must go, but he
took no notice, so I thought the best thing I could do was to
40 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
slip off. The last I saw of him, his head was bent over his
knee, and he was working hard at his fetter, muttering impa
tient imprecations at it and at his leg. The last I heard of
him, I stopped in the mist to listen, and the file was still
going.
CHAPTER IV.
I fully expected to find a constable in the kitchen, waiting
to take me up. But not only was there no constable there,
but no discovery had yet been made of the robbery. Mrs
Joe was prodigiously busy in getting the house ready for the
festivities of the day, and Joe had been put upon the kitchen
door-step to keep him out of the dust-pan—an article into
which his destiny always led him sooner or later when my sister
was vigorously reaping the floors of her establishment.
" And where the deuce ha' you been ?" was Mrs. Joe's Christ
mas salutation, when I and my conscience showed ourselves.
I said I had been down to hear the Carols. "Ah 1 well !"
observed Mrs. Joe. "You might ha' done worse." "Not a
doubt of it," I thought.
"Perhaps if I warn't a blacksmith's wife, and (what's the
same thing) a slave with her apron never off, I should have
been to hear the Carols," said Mrs. Joe. "I'm rather partial
to Carols myself, and that's the best of reasons for my never
hearing any."
Joe, who had ventured into the kitchen after me as the dust
pan retired before us, drew the back of his hand across his
nose with a conciliatory air when Mrs. Joe darted a look at
him, and, when her eyes were withdrawn, secretly crossed
his two forefingers, and exhibited them to iue, as our token that
Mrs. Joe was in a cross temper. This was so much her normal
state, that Joe and I would often, for weeks together, be, as
to our fingers, like monumental Crusaders as to their legs.
We were to have a superb dinner, consisting of a leg of
pickled pork, and greens, and a pair of roast stuffed fowls. A
handsome mince-pie had been made yesterday morning (which
accounted for the mince-meat not being missed), and the pud
ding was already on the boil. These extensive arrangements
occasioned us to be cut off unceremoniously in respect of break
(41)
42 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
fast, "fori an't," said Mrs. Joe, "I an't a going to have no
cramming and gorging and washing up now, with what I've got
before me, I promise you 1"
So we had our slices served out, as if we were two thousand
troops on a forced march, instead of a man and boy at home;
and we took gulps of milk and water, with apologetic counte
nances, from a jug on the dresser. In the meantime Mrs. Joe
put clean white curtains up, and tacked a new flowered
flounce across the wide chimney to replace the old one, and
uncovered the little state parlor across the passage, which was
never uncovered at any other time, but passed the rest of the
year in a cool haze of silver paper, which even extended to the
four little white crockery poodles on the mantle shelf, each with
a black nose, and a basket of flowers in his mouth, and each the
counterpart of the other. Mrs. Joe was a very clean house
keeper, but had an exquisite art of making her cleanliness more
uncomfortable and unacceptable than dirt itself. Cleanliness
is next to Godliness, and some people do the same by their
religion.
My sister having so much to do, was going to church vica
riously ; that is to say, Joe and I were going. In his working
clothes Joe was a well-knit, characteristic-looking blacksmith ;
in his holiday clothes, he was more like a scarecrow in good
circumstances than any thing else. Nothing that he wore then
fitted him or seemed to belong to him, and every thing that he
wore then grazed him. On the present festive occasion he
emerged from his room, when the blithe bells were going, the
picture of misery in a full suit of Sunday penitentials. As to
me, I think my sister must have had some general idea that I
was a young offender whom an Accoucheur Policeman had taken
up (on my birthday), and delivered over to her to be dealt with
according to the outraged majesty of the law. I was always
treated as if I had insisted on being born in opposition to the
dictates of reason, religion, and morality, and against the dis
suading arguments of my best friends ; even when I was taken
to have a new suit of clothes, the tailor had orders to make
them like a kind of Reformatory, and on no account to let me
have the use of my limbs.
Joe and I going to church, therefore, must have been a mov
GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
lug spectacle for compassionate minds. Yet what I suffered
outside was nothing to what I underwent within. The terrors
that had assailed me whenever Mrs. Joe had gone near the
pantry or out of the room, were only to be equaled by the
remorse with which my mind dwelt on what my hands had done.
Under the weight of my wicked secret I pondered whether the
Church would be powerful enough to shield me from the ven
geance of the terrible young man, if I divulged it to that
establishment. I conceived the idea that the time when the bans
were read and when the clergyman said, " Ye are now to de
clare it 1" would be the time for me to rise and propose a
private audience in the vestry. I am far from being quite sure
that I might not have astonished our small congregation by
resorting to this extreme measure, but for its being Christmas
Day and no Sunday.
Mr. Wopsle, the clerk at church, was to dine with us; and
Mr. Hubble the wheel-wright and Mrs. Hubble; and Uncle
Pumblechook (Joe's uncle, but Mrs. Joe appropriated him),
who was a well-to-do corn-chandler in the nearest town, and
drove his own chaise-cart. The dinner hour was half-past one.
When Joe at.d I got home we found the table laid, and Mrs.
Joe dressed, and the dinner dressing, and the front door un
locked (it never was at any other time) for the company to enter
by, and every thing most splendid. And still, not a word of
the robbery.
The time came without bringing with it any relief to my feel
ings, and the company came. Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman
nose and a large bald forehead, had a deep sonorous voice which
he was proud of ; indeed it was understood among his acquaint
ance that if you could only give him his head he would read
the clergyman into fits ; he himself confessed that if the Church
was "thrown open," meaning to competition, he would not
despair of making his mark in it. The Church not being
" thrown open," he was, as I have said, our clerk. But he fin
ished the Amens tremendously ; and when he gave out the
psalm—always giving us the whole verse—he looked all round
the congregation first, as much as to say, " You have heard my
friend overhead; oblige me with your opinion of this!"
I opened the door to the company—making believe that it
44 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
was a habit of ours to open that door—and I opened it first
to Mr. Wopsle, next to Mr. and Mrs. Hubble, and last of all
to Uncle Pumblechook. N. B. I was not allowed to call him
uncle under the severest penalties.
" Mrs. Joe," said Uncle Pumblechook, who was a large,
hard-breathing, middle-aged, slow man, with a mouth like a fish,
dull staring eyes, and sandy hair standing upright on his head,
so that he looked as if he had just been choked, and had
that very moment come to, " I have brought you, as the com
pliments of the season—I have brought you, Mum, a bottle
of sherry wine, and I have brought you, Mum, a bottle of port
wine."
Every Christmas Day he presented himself, as a profound
novelty, with exactly the same words, and carrying the two
bottles like dumb-bells. Every Christmas Day, Mrs. Joe re
plied, as she now replied, " Oh, Un—cle Pum —ble—chook 1
This is kind 1" Every Christmas Day, he retorted, as he now
retorted, " It's no more than your merits. And how are you
all —bobbish ? And how's Sixpennorth of half pence 1" mean
ing me.
We dined on these occasions in the kitchen, and adjourned,
for the nuts and oranges and apples, to the parlor; which was
a change very like Joe's change from his working clothes to his
Sunday's dress. My sister was uncommonly lively on the pre
sent occasion, and indeed was generally more gracious in the
society of Mrs. Hubble than in any other company. I remem
ber Mrs. Hubble as a little, sharp-eared person in curly skyblue,
who held a conventionally juvenile position, because she
had married Mr. Hubble—I don't know at what remote period
—when she was much younger than he. I remember Mr.
Hubble as a tough, high-shouldered, stooping old man, of a
saw-dusty fragrance, with his legs extraordinarily wide apart,
so that in my short and early days I always saw some miles of
open country between them when I met him coming up the lane.
Among this good company I should have felt myself, even if
I hadn't rubbed the pantry, in a false position. Not because I
was squeezed in at an acute angle of the table-cloth with the
table in my chest, and the Pumblechookian elbow in my eye ;
not because I was not allowed to speak (I didn't want to speak),
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 45
nor because I was regaled with the scaly tips of the drumstick!
of the fowls, and with those corners of obscure pork of which
the pig, when living, had had the least reason to be vain. No ;
I should not have minded that, if they would only have left me
alone. But they wouldn't leave me alone. They seemed to
think the opportunity lost, if they failed to point the conversa
tion at me every now and then, and stick the point into me. I
might have been an unfortunate little bull in a Spanish arena:
I got so smartingly touched up by these moral goads.
It began the moment we sat down to dinner. Mr. Wopsle
said grace with theatrical declamation, as it now appears to me,
something like a religious cross of the Ghost in Hamlet with
Richard the Third—and ended with the very proper aspiration
that we might be truly grateful. Upon which my sister instantly
fixed me with her eye, and said, in a low, reproachful voice, " Do
you hear that? Be grateful."
" Especially," said Mr. Pumblechook, " be grateful, boy, to
them which brought you up by hand."
Mrs. Hubble shook her head, and contemplating me with
a mournful presentiment that I should come to no good, asked,
" Why is it that the young are never grateful ?" This mystery
seemed too much for the company until Mr. Hubble tersely
solved it by saying, "Naturally wicious." Everybody then
murmured " Ah 1" and " True 1" and looked at me in a particu
larly unpleasant and personal manner.
Joe's station and influence were something feebler (if possible)
when there was company than when there was none. But he
always aided and abetted when he could, in some way of his own,
and he always did so at dinner-time by giving me gravy, if there
were any. There being plenty of gravy to-day, Joe spooned
into my plate, at this point, about half-a-pint.
A little later on in the dinner, Mr. Wopsle reviewed the
sermon with some severity, and intimated in the usual hypo
thetical case of the Church being " thrown open," what kind
of sermon he would have given them. After favoring them with
some heads of that discourse, he remarked that he considered
the subject of the day's homily ill chosen ; which was the less
excusable, he added, when there were so many subjects "going
about."
46 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
" True again," said Uncle Pumblechook. " You've hit it—
plenty of subjects going about, for them that know how to put
salt upon their tails. That's what's wanted. A man needn't go
far to find a subject if he's ready with his salt box. Why,"
added Mr. Pumblechook, after a short interval of deep reflec
tion, " look at Pork alone. There's a subject 1 If you want
subject, look at Pork 1"
" True, Sir. Many a moral for the young," returned Mr.
Wopsle ; and I knew he was going to bring me in before ho
said it, "might be deducted from that text."
(" You listen to this," said my sister to me, in a severe paren
thesis.)
Joe gave me some more gravy.
" Swine," pursued Mr. Wopsle, in his deepest voice, and
pointing his fork at my blushes as if he were mentioning my
Christian name—" Swine were the companions of the prodigal.
The gluttony of Swine is set before us as an example to the
young." (I thought this pretty well in him who had been
praising up the pork for being so plump and juicy.) "What
is detestable in a pig is more detestable in a boy."
" Or girl," suggested Mr. Hubble.
"Of course, or girl," assented Mr. Wopsle, rather irritably;
"but there is no girl present."
"Besides," said Mr. Pumblechook, turning sharp on me,
"think what you've got to be grateful for. If you'd been born
a squeaker—"
" He was, if ever a child was," said my sister, most emphat
ically. Joe gave me some more gravy.
" Well, but I mean a four-footed squeaker," said Mr. Pumble
chook. " If you had been born such, would you have been here
now ? Not you —"
"Unless in that form," said Mr. Wopsle, nodding toward the
dish." But I don't mean in that form, Sir," returned Mr. Pumble
chook, who had an objection to being interrupted ; " I mean
enjoying himself with his elders and betters, and improving
himself with their conversation, and rolling in the lap of luxury.
Would he have been doing that ? No, he wouldn't. And
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 47
what would have been your destination ?" turning on me again.
" You would have been disposed of for so many shillings, ac
cording to the market price of the article, and Dunstable, the
butcher, would have come up to you as you lay in your straw,
and he would have whipped you under his left arm, and with
his right he would have tucked up his frock to get a penknife
from out of his waistcoat-pocket, and he would have shed your
blood and had your life. No bringing up by hand then. Not
a bit of it!"
Joe offered me more gravy, which I was afraid to take.
" He was a world of trouble to you, Ma'am,'' said Mrs.
Hubble, commiserating my sister.
Trouble ?" echoed my sister ; " trouble " And then entered
on a fearful catalogue of all the illnesses I had been guilty of,
and all the acts of sleeplessness I had committed, and all the
high places I had tumbled from, and all the low places I had
tumbled into, and all the injuries I had done myself, and all
the times she had wished me in my grave, and I had contuma
ciously refused to go there.
I think the Romans must have aggravated one another very
much with their noses. Perhaps they became the restless
people they were in consequence. Anyhow, Mr. Wopsle's
Roman nose so aggravated me, during the recital of my misde
meanors, that I should have liked to pull it until he howled.
But all I had endured up to this time was nothing in compar
ison with the awful feeling that took possession of me when the
pause was broken which ensued upon my sister's recital, and in
which pause everybody had looked at me (as I felt deeply conscious)
with indignation and abhorrence.
"Yet," said Mr. Pumblechook, leading the company gently
back to the theme from which they had strayed, " Pork—
regarded as biled—is rich, too ; ain't it ?"
" Have a little brandy, uncle ?" said my sister.
O Heavens, it had come at last 1 He would fiiid it was weak,
he would say it was weak, and I was lost 1 I held tight to the
leg of the table with both hands, and awaited my fate.
My sister went for the stone bottle, came back with the stone
bottle, and poured his brandy out, no one else taking any. The
wretched man trifled with his glass—took it up, looked at it
48 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
through the light, put it down—prolonged my misery. All
this time Mrs. Joe and Joe were busily clearing the table for
the pie and pudding.
I couldn't keep my eyes off him. Always holding tight by
the leg of the table with my hands and feet, I saw the miserable
creature finger his glass playfully, take it up, smile, throw his
head back, and drink the brandy off. Instantly afterward the
company were seized with unspeakable consternation, owing to
his springing to his feet, turning round several times in an appalling
spasmodic, hooping-cough dance, and rushing out at the
door ; he then became visible through the window, violently
stamping and expectorating, making the most hideous faces,
and apparently out of his mind.
I held on tight, while Mrs. Joe and Joe ran to him. I
didn't know how I had done it, but I had no doubt I had
murdered him somehow. In my dreadful situation it was a re
lief when he was brought back, and surveying the company all
round, as if they had disagreed with him, sank down into his
chair with the one significant gasp, " Tar 1"
I had filled up the bottle from the tar-water jug. I knew
he would be worse by-and-by. I moved the table, like a
Medium of the present day, by the vigor of my unseen grasp
upon it.
"Tar!" cried my sister, in amazement. "Why, however
could it come there ?"
But Uncle Pumblechook, who was omnipotent in that
kitchen, wouldn't bear the word, wouldn't hear the subject men
tioned, imperiously waved it all away with his hand, and asked
for hot gin and water. My sister, who had begun to be alarm
ingly meditative, had to employ herself actively in getting the
gin, the hot water, the sugar, and the lemon-peel, and mixing
them. For the time, at least, I was saved. I still held on the
leg of the table, but clutched it now with the fervor of gratitude.
By degrees I became calm enough to release my grasp and
partake of pudding. Mr. Pumblechook partook of pudding.
All partook of pudding. The course terminated, and Mr.
Pumblechook had begun to beam under the genial influence
of the gin and water. I began to think I should get over the
day when my sister said to Joe, " Clear plates—cold."
GREAT EXPECTATIONS 40
I clutched the leg of the table again immediately, and pressed
it to my bosom as if it had been the companion of my youth
and friend of my soul. I foresaw what was coming, and I felt
that this time I really was gone.
" You must taste," said my sister, addressing the guests
with her best grace, " you must really taste, to finish with, such
a delightful and delicious present of Uncle Pumblechook's 1"
Must they 1 Let them not hope it !
"You must know," said my sister, rising, "it's a pie—a
savory pork-pie."
The company murmured their compliments; and Uncle
Pumblechook, sensible of having deserved well of bis fellowcreatures,
and having distinguished himself by his gift, said
vivaciously, all things considered, "Well, Mrs. Joe, we'll do
our best endeavors ; let us have a cut at this same pie."
My sister went out to get it I heard her steps proceed to
the pantry. I saw Mr. Pumblechook balance his knife. I
saw reawakening appetite in the Roman nostrils of Mr.
Wopsle. I heard Mr. Hubble remark that "a bit of savory
pork-pie would lay a-top of any thing and do no harm,"
and I heard Joe say, " You shall have some, Pip." I have
never been absolutely certain whether I uttered a shrill cry of
terror merely in spirit, or in the bodily hearing of the company.
I felt that I could hear no more, and that I must run away.
I released the leg of the table, and ran for my life.
But I ran no further than the house door, for there I ran
head foremost into a party of soldiers with their muskets, one
of whom held out a pair of hand-cuffs to me, saying: " Here
you are, look sharp, come on 1"
3
CHAPTER V.
The apparition of a file of soldiers ringing down the butt
end of their loaded muskets on our doorstep caused the dinner
party to rise from table confused, and caused Mrs. Joe re
entering the kitchen empty-handed, to stop short and stare,
after her first wondering lament of "Lord gracious, what's gone
with the pie 1"
The sergeant and I were in the kitchen when Mrs. Joe stood
staring ; at which crisis I partly recovered the use of my senses.
It was the sergeant who had spoken to me, and he was now
looking round at the company, with his hand-cuffs invitingly
extended toward them in his right hand, and his left on my
shoulder.
"Excuse me, ladies and gentlemen," said the sergeant, "but
as I have mentioned at the door to this young shaver (which
he hadn't), I am on a chase for the King, and I want the
blacksmith."
"And pray what might you want with him?" retorted my
sister, quick to resent his being wanted at all.
" Missus," returned the gallant sergeant, "speaking for my
self, I should reply, the honor and pleasure of his wife's ac
quaintance ; speaking for the King, I answer a little job done."
This was received as rather neat in the sergeant ; insomuch
that Mr. Pumblechook cried audibly, "Good agam1"
" You see, blacksmith," said the sergeant, who had by this
time picked out Joe with his eye, " we have had an accident
with these, and find the lock of one of 'em goes wrong, and
the coupling don't act pretty. As they are wanted for im
mediate service, will you throw your eye over them ?"
Joe threw his eye over them, and pronounced that the job
would necessitate the lighting of his forge fire, and would take
nearer two houm than one. " Then will you set about it at
(60)
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 51
once, blacksmith, " said the sergeant, " as it's on his Majesty's
service ; and if my men can bear a hand any where, they'll make
themselves useful." With that he called to his men, who came
trooping into the kitchen one after another, and piled their
arms in a corner. And there they stood about as soldiers do;
now, with their hands loosely clasped before them ; now, rest
ing a knee or a shoulder ; now, easing a belt or a pouch ; now,
opening the door to spit stiffly over their high stocks out into
the yard.
All these things I saw without knowing that I saw them, for
I was in mortal terror. But, beginning to perceive that the
handcuffs were not for me, and that the military had so far got
the better of the pie as to put it in the back ground for the
moment, I collected a little more of my scattered wits.
"Would you give me the time ?" said the sergeant, address
ing himself to Mr. Pumblechook, as a man whose appreciative
powers justified the inference that he was equal to the time.
" It's just gone half past two."
"That's not so bad," said the sergeant, reflecting; "even if
I were forced to halt here nigh two hours, that'll do. How far
might you call yourselves from the marshes here ? Not above
a mile, I reckon ?"
"Just a mile," said Mrs. Joe.
" That'll do. We begin to close in upon 'em about dusk.
A little before dusk, my orders are. That'll do."
" Convicts, sergeant ?" said Mr. Wopsle, in a matter-ofcourse
way.
" Ay 1" returned the sergeant, "two. They're pretty well
known to be out on the marshes still, and they won't try to get
clear of 'em before dusk. Any body here seen any thing of
any such game ?"
Every body, myself excepted, said no, with confidence. No
body thought of me.
" Well 1" said the sergeant, they'll find themselves trapped
in a circle, I expect, sooner than they count on. Now, black
smith 1 If you're ready, the King is."
Joe had got his coat and waistcoat and cravat off, and his
leather apron on, and passed into the forge. One of the
soldiers opened its wooden windows, another lighted the fire,
52 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
another turned to at the bellows the rest stood round the
blaze, which was soon roaring. Then Joe began to hammer
and clink, hammer and clink, and all looked on.
The interest of the impending pursuit not only absorbed
the general attention, but even made my sister generous. She
drew a pitcher of beer from the cask for the soldiers, and
invited the sergeant to take a glass of brandy. But Mr. Pumblechook
said, sharply, " Give him wine, mum. I'll engage
there's no Tar in that ;" so the sergeant thanked him and said
that, as he preferred his drink without tar, he would take wine,
if it was equally convenient. When it was given him he drank
his Majesty's health and Compliments of the Season, and took
It all at a mouthful and smacked his lips.
" Good stuff, eh, sergeant ?" said Mr. Pumblechook.
"I'll tell you something," returned the sergeant; " I suspect
that stuff's of your providing."
Mr. Pumblechook, with a fat sort of laugh, said, "Ay, ay?
Why?"
"Because," returned the sergeant, clapping him on the
shoulder, "you're a man that knows what's what."
"D'ye think so ?" said Mr. Pumblechook, with his former
laugh. " Have another glass."
"With you. Hob and nob," returned the sergeant. "The
top of mine to the foot of yours, the foot of yours to the top
of mine. Ring once, ring twice, the best tune on the Musical
Glasses 1 Your health. May you live a thousand years, and
never be a worse judge of the right sort than at the present
moment of your life 1"
The sergeant tossed off his glass again and seemed quite
ready for more. I noticed that Mr. Pumblechook in his hos
pitality appeared to forget that he had made a present of the
wine, but took the bottle from Mrs. Joe and had all the credit
of handing it about in a gush of joviality. Even I got some.
And he was so very free of the wine that he even called for
the other bottle, and handed that about with the same liberality
when the first was gone.
As I watched them while they all stood clustered about the
forge enjoying themselves so much, I thought what terrible
good sauce for a dinner my fugitive friend in the marshes waa

THEN JOE BEGAN TO HAMMER AND CLINK, HAMMER AND CLINK.

GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 53
They had not enjoyed themselves a quarter so much before
the entertainment was brightened with the excitement he fur
nished. And now, when they were all in lively expectation
of those two villains being taken, and when the bellows seemed
to roar for them, the fire to flare for them, the smoke to hurry
out in pursuit of them, Joe to hammer and clink for them, and
all the murky shadows on the wall to stare at them in menace
as the blaze rose and sank, and the red-hot sparks dropped and
died, the pale afternoon outside almost seemed, in my pitying
young fancy, to have turned pale on their account, poor
wretches 1
At last, Joe's job was done, and the ringing and roaring
stopped. As Joe got on his coat, he mustered courage to pro
pose that some of us should go down with the soldiers and see
what came of the hunt. Mr. Pumblechook and Mr. Hubble
declined, on the plea of a pipe and ladies' society ; but Mr.
Wopsle said he would go if Joe would. Joe said he was
agreeable, and he would take me, if Mrs. Joe approved. We
never should have got leave to go, I am sure, but for Mrs
Joe's curiosity to know all about it and how it ended. As it
was, she merely stipulated, " If you bring the boy back with
his head blown off by a musket, don't say it was my doing."
The sergeant took a polite leave of the ladies, and parted
from Mr. Pumblechook as from a comrade : though I doubted
if he were quite as fully sensible of that gentleman's merits
under arid conditions as when something to drink was going.
His men resumed their muskets and fell in. Mr. Wopsle, Joe,
and I, received strict charge to keep in the rear, and to speak
no word after we reached the marshes. When we were all out
in the raw air and steadily moving toward our business, I
treasonably whispered to Joe, " I hope, Joe, we sha'n't find
them ;" and Joe whispered to me, " I'd give a shilling if they
had cut and run, Pip."
We were joined by no stragglers from our village, for
the weather was cold and threatening, the way dreary, the
footing bad, dusk coming on, and the people had good fires
in-doors and were keeping the day. A few faces hurried to
glowing windows and looked after us, but none came out.
We passed the finger-post, and held straight on to the church
51 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
yard. There we were stopped a few minutes by a signal from
the sergeant's hand, while two or three of his men dispersed
themselves among the graves, and examined the porch. They
came in again without finding any thing, and then we struck
out on the open marshes, through the gate at the side of the
church-yard. A bitter sleet came rattling against us on the
east wind, and Joe took me on his back.
Now that we were out upon the dismal wilderness, where
they little thought I had been within eight or nine hours and
had seen both men hiding, I considered, for the first time, with
great dread, if we should come upon them, would my particular
convict suppose that it was I who had brought the soldiers
there ? He had asked me if I was a deceiving imp, and he
had said I should be a fierce young hound if I joined the
hunt against him. Wou'id he believe that I was both imp
>. and hound in treacherous earnest, and had betrayed him ?
It was of no use asking myself this question now. There
I was, on Joe's back, and there was Joe beneath me, charging
out the ditches in the nimblest manner, and stimulating Mr.
Wopsle not to tumble on his Roman nose, and to keep up
with us. The soldiers were in front of us, extended into a
> pretty wide line with an interval between man and man. We
were taking the exact course I had begun with, and from which
I had diverged in the mist. Either the mist was not out again
yet, or the wind had moved it. Under the low red glare of
sunset the beacon, and the gibbet, and the mound of the
Battery, and the opposite shore of the river, were plain enough,
though all of a watery lead color.
With my heart thumping like a small blacksmith at Joe's
broad shoulder, I looked all about for any sign of the convicts.
I could see none, I could hear none. Mr. Wopsle had
greatly alarmed me more than once by his blowing and hard
breathing ; but I knew the sounds by this time, and could
dissociate them from the object of pursuit. I got a dreadful
start, and thought I heard the file still going; but it was only
a sheep-bell. The sheep stopped in their eating and looked
timidly at us ; and the cattle, their heads turned from the wind
and sleet, stared angrily, as if they held us responsible for
both these annoyances : but, except these things, and the shud«
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 55
der of the whole dying day, there was no break in the uniform ^
stillness of the marshes.
The soldiers were moving on in the direction of the old
Battery, and we were moving on a little way behind them,
when, all of a sudden, we all stopped. For there had reached
us, on the wings of the wind and rain, a long shout. It was
repeated. It was at a distance toward the east, but it was
long and loud. Nay, there seemed to be two shouts raised
together—if one might judge from a confusion in the sound.
To this effect the sergeant and the nearest men were speaking
under their breath when Joe and I came up. After another
moment's listening, Joe (who was a good judge) agreed, and
Mr. Wopsle (who was a bad judge) also agreed. The sergeant,
a quick, decisive man, ordered that the sound should not be
answered, but that the course should be changed, and that his
men should make toward it " at the double." So we slanted
to the right (where the East was), and Joe pounded away so
wonderfully that I had to hold on tight to keep my seat.
It was a run indeed now, and what Joe called, in the only
two words he spoke all the time, "a buster." Down banks
and up banks, and over gates, and splashing into dikes: no
man cared where he went. As we came nearer to the shouting,
it became more and more apparent that it was made by more
than one voice. Sometimes it seemed to stop altogether,
and then the soldiers stopped. When it broke out again the
soldiers made for it at a greater rate than ever, and we after
them. After a while we had so run it down that we could
hear one voice calling "Murder!" and another voice, "Con
victs 1 Runaways 1 Guard 1 guard 1 This way for the runa
way convicts !" Then both voices would seem to be stifled in
a struggle, and then would break out again. And when it had
come to this the soldiers ran like deer, and Joe too.
The sergeant run in first, when we had run the noise quite
down, and two of his men ran in close upon him. Their pieces
were cocked and leveled when we all ran in.
" Here are lots more 1" panted the sergeant, struggling with
something at the bottom of a ditch. "Surrender, you two 1
and confound you for two wild beasts 1 Come asunder 1"
Water was splashing, and mud was splashing, and oaths
66 GEEAT EXPECTATIONS.
were being sworn, and blows were being struck, when half a
dozen more men went down into the ditch to help the sergeant,
and dragged out, separately, my convict and the other one.
Both were bleeding and panting and execrating and strug
gling ; but of course I knew them both directly.
" Mind 1" said my convict, wiping blood from his face, with
his ragged sleeves, and shaking torn hair from his fingers ; " I
took him I /giv' him up to you! Mind that!"
"It's not much to be particular about!" said the sergeant,
coolly ; " It'll do you small good, my man, being in the same
plight yourself. Handcuffs there!"
" I don't expect it to do me any good. I don't want it to
do me more good than it does now," said my convict, with a
terrible laugh. " I took him. He knows it. That's enough
for me."
The other convict was livid to look at, and, in addition to
the old bruise on the left side of his face, seemed to be bruised
and torn all over. He could not so much as get his breath to
speak, until they were both separately handcuffed, but leaned
upon a soldier to keep himself from falling.
" Take notice, guard, that he tried to murder me," were his
first words.
" Tried to murder him ?" said my convict, disdainfully. " Try,
and not do it 1 I took him, and giv' him up ; that's what I
done. I not only prevented him getting off the marshes, but
I dragged him here—dragged him this far on his way back.
He's a gentleman, if you please, that villain. Now the Hulks
has got its gentleman again, through me. Murder him ? Worth
my while, too, to murder him, when I could do worse and drag
him back 1"
The other one still gasped, "He tried—he tried—to—murder
me. Bear—bear witness."
" Lookee here!" said my convict to the sergeant. "I got
clear of the prison-ship ; I made a dash, and I done it. I could
ha' got clear of these death-cold flats likewise—look at my leg ;
you won't find much iron on it—if I hadn't made discovery
that he was there. Let him go free ? Let him profit by the
means as I found out? Let him make use of me afresh and
again 1 Once more ? No, no, no. If I had died at the bottom
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 67
there"—and he made an emphatic motion at the ditch with his
manacled hands—" I'd have held to him with that grip that you
should have been safe to find him in my hold."
The other fugitive, who was evidently in extreme fear of his
companion., repeated, " He tried to murder me. I should have
been a dead man if you had not come up."
" He lies!" said my convict, with fierce energy. " He always
lies. He's a liar born, and he'll die a liar. Look at his face ;
ain't it written there? Let him turn them eyes of his on me.
I defy him to do it."
The other, with an effort at a scornful smile—which could not,
however, collect the nervous working of his mouth into any set
expression —looked at the soldiers, and looked about at the
marshes and at the sky, but certainly did not look at the speaker.
" Do you see him ?" pursued my convict. " Do you see what
a villain he is? Do you see them groveling and wandering
eyes? That's how he looked when we were tried together.
He never looked at me."
The other, always working and working bis dry lips and
turning his eyes restlessly about him far and near, did at last
turn them for a moment on the speaker, with the words, "You
are not much to look at," and with a half-taunting glance at
the bound hands. At that point my convict became so frantic
ally exasperated that he would have rushed upon him but for
the interposition of the soldiers. " Didn't I tell you," said the
other convict then, "that he would murder me if he could?"
And any one could see that he shook, and that there broke
out upon his lips curious white flukes, like thin snow.
"Enough of this parley," said the sergeant. " Light those
torches."
As one of the soldiers, who carried a basket in lieu of a gun,
went down on his knee to open it my convict looked round
him for the first time and saw me. I had alighted from Joe's
buck on the brink of the ditch when he came up, and had not
moved since. I looked at him eagerly when he looked at me,
and moved my hands and shook my head. I had been waiting
for him to see me, that I might try to assure him of my
innocence. It was not at all expressed to me that he even
comprehended my intention, for he gave me a look that I did
D8 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
not understand, and it all passed in a moment. But if he had
looked at me for an hour or a day, I could not have remem
bered his face ever afterward as having been more attentive.
The soldier with the basket soon got a light, and lighted
three or four torches, and took one himself and distributed
the others. It had been almost dark before, but now it seemed
quite dark, and soon afterward very dark. Before we de
parted from that spot four of the soldiers, standing in a ring,
fired twice into the air. Presently we saw other torches
lighted at some distance behind us, and others on the marshes
on the opposite bank of the river. " All right," said the ser
geant. "March!"
We had not gone far when three cannon were fired ahead of
us with a sound that seemed to burst something inside my ear.
" You are expected on board," said the sergeant to my convict ;
"they know you are coming. Don't straggle, my men. Close
up here."
The two were kept apart, and each walked surrounded by a
separate guard. I had hold of Joe's hand now, and Joe
carried one of the torches. Mr. Wopsle had been for going
back, but Joe was resolved to see it out, so we went on with
the party. There was a reasonably good path now, mostly on
the edge of the river, with a divergence here and there where
a dike came, with a miniature wind-mill on it, and a slimy
sluice-gate. When I looked round I could see the other lights
coming on after us. The torches we carried dropped great
blotches of fire upon the track, and I could see these, too,
smoking and flaring. I could see nothing else but black dark
ness. Our lights warmed the air about us with their pitchy
blaze, and the two wretched men seemed to like that rather as
they limped along in the midst of the muskets. We could
not go fast because of their lameness, and they were so spent
that two or three times we had to halt while they rested.
After an hour or so of this traveling we came to a rough
wooden hut and a landing-place. There was a guard in the
hut, and they challenged us, and the sergeant answered. Then
we went into the hut, where there was a smell of tobacco
and whitewash, and a bright fire, and a lamp, and a stand of
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. B9
muskets, and a drum, and a low wooden bedstead, like an im
mense mangle without the machinery, capable of holding about
a dozen soldiers all at once. Three or four soldiers who lay
upon it were not much interested in us, but just lifted their
heads and took a stare, and then lay down again. The ser
geant made some kind' of report, and some entry in a book,
and then the convict, whom I call the other convict, was
drafted off with his guard to go on board first.
My convict never looked at me, except that once that I have
mentioned. While we stood in the hut he stood before the
fire looking at it, or putting up his miserable feet by turns
upon the hob and looking at them as if he pitied them. Sud
denly he turned to the sergeant, and remarked :
"I wish to say something respecting this escape. It may
prevent some persons lying under suspicion alonger roe."
" You can say what you like," returned the sergeant, stand
ing looking at him with his arms folded ; " but you have no
call to say it here, you know. You'll have opportunity enough
to say about it, and hear about it, before it's done with."
" I know that, but this is another pint, a separate pint. A
man can't starve ; at least I can't. I took some wittles up
at the willage over yonder—where the church stands a'most
out on the marshes."
" You mean stole ?" said the sergeant.
" Ah 1 I'll tell you where from. From the blacksmith's."
" Halloa 1" said the sergeant, staring at Joe.
" Halloa, Pip 1" said Joe, staring at me.
" It was some broken wittles—that's what it was—and a
dram of liquor, and a pie."
" Have you happened to miss such an article as a pie, black
smith ?" asked the sergeant, confidentially.
" Mrs. Joe did, at the very moment when you came in.
Don't you know, Pip ?"
"Oh!" said my convict to Joe, in a moody manner, and
without the least glance at me. " So you're the blacksmith
are you ? Then I'm sorry to say I've eat your pie."
"God knows you're welcome to it—so far as it was ever
mine," returned Joe, with a saving remembrance of Mrs. Joe.
" We don't know what you have done ; but we wouldn't
60 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
have you starved to death for it, miserable fellow-creature
whatever it was.—Would us, Pip ?"
The something that I had noticed before clicked in the man's
throat again, and he turned his back. The boat had returned,
and his guard were ready, so we followed him to the landingplace,
made of rough stakes and stones, and saw him put into
the boat, which was rowed by a crew of convicts like himself.
No one appeared glad to see him, or sorry to see him, or
spoke a word, except that somebody called as if to dogs,
" Give way, you 1" which was the signal for the dip of the oars.
By the light of the torches we saw the black Hulk lying out
a little way from the mud of the shore, like a wicked Noah's
ark ; cribbed, and barred, and anchored by massive rusty chains,
the prison-ship was ironed like the prisoners. We saw the
boat go alongside, and we saw him taken up the side and dis
appear. Then the ends of the torches were flung hissing into
the water, and went out, as if it were all over with him.
CHAPTER VI.
My state of mind regarding the pilfering from which I had
been so unexpectedly exonerated, did not impel me to frank
disclosure; but I hope it had some dregs of good at the bottom >
of it.
I do not recall that I felt any tenderness of conscience in
reference to Mrs Joe when the fear of being found out was
lifted off me. But I loved Joe—perhaps for no better reason
in those early days than because the dear fellow let me love
him—and, as to him, my inner self was not so easily composed.
It was much upon my mind (particularly when I first saw him
looking about for his file) that I ought to tell Joe the whole
truth. Yet I did not, and for the reason that I mistrusted
that if I did he would think me worse than I was. The fear
of losing Joe's confidence, and of thenceforth sitting in the
chimney corner at night staring drearily at my forever lost
companion and friend, tied up my tongue. I morbidly repre
sented to myself that if Joe knew it, I never afterward could
see him at the fireside feeling his fair whisker, without think
ing that he was meditating on it. That if Joe knew it, I never
afterward could see him glance, however casually, at yesterday's
meat or pudding when it came on to-day's table, without
thinking that he was debating whether I had been in the
pantry. That if Joe knew it, and at any subsequent period of
our joint domestic life remarked that his beer was flat or thick,
the conviction that he suspected Tar in it would bring a rush of
blood to my face. In a word, I was too cowardly to do what
I knew to be right, as I had been too cowardly to avoid doing
what I knew to be wrong. I had had no intercourse with peo
ple at that time, and I imitated none of the host of people who
act in this manner ; quite an untaught genius, I made the discov
ery of the line of action for myself.
(61)
82 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
As I was sleepy before we were far away from the prison-ship,
Joe took me on his back again and carried me home. He must
have had a tiresome journey of it, for Mr. Wopsle, being
knocked up, was in such a very bad temper that if the Church
had been thrown open he probably would have excommunicated
the whole expedition, beginning with Joe and myself. In his
simple lay capacity he simply persisted in sitting down in the
damp to such an insane extent, that, when his coat was taken
off to be dried at the kitchen fire, the circumstantial evidence
on his trowsers would have hanged him if it had been a capital
offence. By that time I was staggering on the kitchen floor like a
little drunkard, through having been newly set upon my feet,
and through having been fast asleep, and through waking in the
heat and lights and noise of tongues. As I came to myself
(with the aid of a heavy thump between the shoulders, and the
restorative exclamation " Yah 1 Was there ever such a boy as
this 1" from my sister) I found Joe telling them about the con
vict's confession, and all the visitors suggesting different ways
by which he had got into the pantry. Mr. Pumblechook made
out, after carefully surveying the premises, that he had first got
upon the roof of the forge, and had then got upon the roof of
the house, and had then let himself down the kitchen chimney
by a rope made of his bedding cut into, strips; and as Mr.
Pumblechook was very positive and drove his own chaise-cart
—over everybody—it was agreed that it must be so. Mr.
Wopsle, indeed, wildly cried out " No 1" with the feeble malice
of a tired man ; but as he had no theory, and no coat on, he
was unanimously set at naught—not to mention his smoking
hard behind, as he stood with his back to the kitchen fire to draw
the damp out, which was not calculated to inspire confidence. This was all I heard that night before my sister clutched me,
as a slumberous offence to the company's eyesight, and assisted
me up to bed with such a strong hand that I seemed to have
twenty boots on, and to he dangling them all against the edges
of the stairs. My state of mind, as I have described it. began
before I was up in the morning, and lasted long after the sub
ject had died out, and had ceased to be mentioned saving on ex
ceptional occasions.
CHAPTER VII.
At the time when I stood in the church-yard, reading the
family tombstones, I had just enough learning to be able to spell
them out. My construction even of their simple meaning was
not very correct, for I read " wife of the Above" as a compli
mentary reference to my father's exaltation to a better world ;
and if any one of my deceased relations had been referred to as
" Below," I have no doubt I should have formed the worst
opinions of that member of the family. Neither were my no
tions of the theological positions to which my Catechism bound
me at all accurate, for I have a lively remembrance that I sup- »
posed my declaration that I was to " walk in the same all the
days of my life" laid me under an obligation always to go
through the village from our house in one particular direction,
and never to vary it by turning down by the wheelright's or up
by the mill.
When I was old enough I was to be apprenticed to Joe,
and until I could assume that dignity I was not to be what Mrs.
Joe called " Pompeyed," or pampered. Therefore I was not
only odd-boy about the forge, but if any neighbor happened to
want an extra boy to frighten birds, or pick up stones, or do
any such job, I was favored with the employment ; but in order
that our superior position might not be compromised thereby
a money-box was kept on the kitchen mantle-shelf, into which it
was publicly made known that all my earnings were dropped.
I have an impression that they were to be contributed even
tually toward the liquidation of the National Debt, but I know
I had no hope of any personal participation in the treasure.
Mr. Wopsle's great aunt kept an evening school in the vil
lage ; that is to say, she was an ancient woman of limited mean!)
and unlimited infirmity, who used to go to sleep from six to
seven every evening, in the society of youth who paid three
(63)
64 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
pence per week each for the improving opportunity of seeing
her do it. She rented a three-roomed cottage, and Mr.
Wopsle had the room up stairs, where we students used to
overhear him reading aloud in a most dignified and terrific
manner, and occasionally bumping on the ceiling. There was a
fiction that Mr. Wopsle "examined" the scholars once a quarter.
What he did on those occasions was to turn up his cuffs, stick
up his hair, and give us Mark Antony's oration over the body
of Caesar. This was always followed by Collins's Ode on the
Passions, wherein I particularly venerated Mr. Wopsle as Fear,
whistling to keep his courage up. It was not with me then,
as it was in later life, when I fell into the society of the Pas
sions, and compared them with Collins and Wopsle, rather to
the disadvantage of both gentlemen.
Mr. Wopsle's great aunt, besides keeping this Educational
Institution, kept—in the same room—a little general shop.
She had no idea what stock she had, or what the price of any
thing in it was; but there was a little greasy memorandum book
kept in a drawer, which served as a Catalogue of Prices, and
by this oracle Biddy arranged all the shop transactions. Biddy
was Mr. Wopsle's great aunt's grand-daughter; I confess my
self quite unequal to the working out of the poblem what rela
tion she was to Mr. Wopsle. She was an orphan like myself ;
like, me, too, had been brought up by hand. She was most
noticeable, I thought, in respect of her extremities; for her
hair always wanted brushing, her hands always wanted washing,
and her shots always wanted mending and pulling up at the
heel. This description must be received, however, with a weekday
limitation. On Sundays she went to church elaborated.
Much of my unassisted self, and more by the help of Biddy
than of Mr. Wopsle's great-aunt, I struggled through the alpha
bet as if it had been a bramble-bush ; getting considerably wor
ried and scratched by every letter. After that I fell among those
thieves, the nine figures, who seemed every evening to do some
thing new to disguise themselves and baffle recognition. But
at last I began, in a purblind groping way, to read, write, and
cipher, on the very smallest scale.
One night I was sitting in the chimney corner with my
slate, expending great efforts on the production of a letter to
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 65
Joe. I think it must have been a full year after our hunt upon
the marshes, for it was a long time after, and it was winter and
a hard frost. With an alphabet on the hearth at my feet for
reference, I contrived in an hour or two to print and smear this
epistle :
" mI deEer JO i opE U r krWitE wEll i opE i shAl
soN B haBelL 4 2 teeDge U JO aN theN wE shOrl b sO
glOdd aN wEn i M preNgtD 2 u JO woT larX aN blEvE
ME inF xn PiP."
There was no indispensable necessity for my communicating
with Joe by letter, inasmuch as he sat beside me and we were
alone. But I delivered this written communication (slate and
all) with my own hand, and Joe received it as a miracle of eru
dition.
" I say, Pip, old chap 1" cried Joe, opening his blue eyes wide.
" what a scholar you are 1 An't you ?"
" I should like to be," said I, glancing at the slate as he
held it, with a misgiving that the writing was rather hilly.
" Why, here's a J," said Joe, " and a O equal to anythink !
Here's a J and a O, Pip, and a J-O, Joe."
I had never heard Joe read aloud to any greater extent than
this monosyllable, and I had observed at church last Sunday
when I accidentally held our Prayer-book up side down, that
it seemed to suit his convenience quite as well as if it had been
all right. Wishing to embrace the present occasion of finding
out whether in teaching Joe I should have to begin quite at
the beginning, I said, " Ah 1 But read the rest, Joe."
"The rest, eh, Pip?" said Joe, looking at it with a slowly
searching eye, " One, two, three. Why, here's three Js and
three Os, and three J-O, Joes in it, Pip 1"
I leaned over Joe, and, with the aid of my forefinger, read
him the whole letter. " Astonishing 1" said Joe, when I had finished. "You are
a scholar."
" How do you spell Gargery, Joe ? I asked him, with a mo
dest patronage.
"I don't spell it at all," said Joe
" But supposing you did ?"
4
GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
"It canH be supposed," said Joe. "But I'm oncommon
fond of reading, too."
" Are you, Joe J"
" On-common. Give me," said Joe, " a good book, or a
good newspaper, and sit me down afore a good fire, and I ask
no better. Lord !" he continued, after rubbing his knees a little,
" when you do come to a J and a O, and says you, ' Here, at
last, is a J-O, Joe,' how interesting reading is 1"
I derived from this that Joe's education, like steam, was yet
in its infancy. Pursuing the subject, I inquired :
" Didn't you ever go to school, Joe, when you were as little
as inc ?"
" No, Pip."
" Why didn't you ever go to school, Joe, when you were as
little as me ?"
" Well, Pip," said Joe, taking up the poker and settling him
self to his usual occupation when he was thoughtful, of slowly
raking the fire between the lower bars, " I'll tell you. My fa
ther, Pip, he were given to drink, and when he were overtook
with drink he hammered away at my mother most onmerciful.
It were a'most the only hammering he did, indeed, 'xcepting at
myself. And he hammered at me with a wigor only to be
equaled by the wigor with which he didn't hammer at his anwil.
You're a listening and understanding, Pip ?"
" Yes, Joe."
" Consequence—my mother and me we ran away from my
father several times ; and then my mother she'd go out to work,
and she'd say, ' Joe,' she'd say, ' now, please God, you shall
have some schooling, child,' and she'd put me to school. But
my father were that good in his hart that he couldn't abear to
be without us. So he'd come with a most tremenjous crowd,
and make such a row at the doors of the houses where we was,
that they used to be obligated to have no more to do with us
and to give us up to him. And then he took us home and
hammered us. Which you see, Pip," said Joe, pausing in his
meditative raking of the fire, and looking at me, " were a draw
back on my learning."
" Certainly, poor Joe I"
" Though mind you, Pip," said Joe, with a judicial touch or
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 67
two of the poker on the top bar, " rendering unto all their doo,
and maintaining equal justice betwixt man and man, my father
were that good in his hart, don't you
I didn't see ; but I didn't say so.
"Well!" Joe pursued, "somebody must keep the pot a
biling, Pip, or the pot won't bile, don't you know ?"
I saw that, and said so.
" 'Consequence—my father didn't make objections to my
going to work ; so I went to work at my present calling, which
were his too, if he would have followed it, and I worked tolera
ble hard, I assure you, Pip. In time I were able to keep him,
and I kep him till he went off in a purple leptic fit. And it
were my intentions to have had put upon his tombstone that
Whatsume'er the failings on his part, Remember reader he were
that good in his hart."
Joe recited this couplet with such manifest pride and careful
perspicuity that I asked him if he had made it himself?
"I made it," said Joe, "my own self. I made it in a mo
ment. It was like striking out a horse-shoe complete in a single
blow. I never was so much surprised in all my life—couldn't
credit my own ed—to tell you the truth, hardly believed it was
my own ed. As I was saying, Pip, it were my intentions to have
had it cut over him ; but poetry costs money, cut it how you
will, small or large, and it were not done. Not to mention
bearers, all the money that could be spared were wanted for my
mother. She were in poor elth, and quite broke. She weren't
long of following, poor soul, and her share of peace come round
at last."
Joe's blue eyes turned a little watery ; he rubbed, first one of
them, and then the other, in a most uncongenial and uncomfort
able manner, with the round knob on the top of the poker.
" It were but lonesome then," said Joe, "living here alone,
and I got acquainted with your sister. Now, Pip," Joe looked
firmly at me, as if he knew I was not going to agree with him,
"your sister is a fine figure of a woman."
I could not help looking at the fire in an obvious state of
doubt.
" Whatever family opinions, or what ever the world's opin
ions, on that subject may be, Pip, your sister is"—Joe tapped
68 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
the top bar with the poker after every word following—" a—
line—figure—of—a—woman 1"
I could think of nothing better to say than "I am glad you
think so, Joe."
"So am I," returned Joe, catching me up. "Jam glad I
think so, Pip. A little redness, or a little matter of Bone, here
or there, what does it signify to Me ?"
/ I sagaciously observed, if it didn't signify to him, to whom
did it signify ?
"Certainly 1" assented Joe. "That's it. You're right, old
chap 1 When I got acquainted with your sister, it were the
talk how she was bringing you up by hand. Very kind of her
too, all the folks said, and I said, along with all the folks. As
to you," Joe pursued, with a countenance expressive of seeing
something very nasty indeed : "if you could have been aware
how small and flabby and mean you was, dear me, you'd have
formed the most contemptible opinions of yourself!"
Not exactly relishing this, I said, " Never mind me, Joe."
"But I did mind you, Pip," he returned, with tender simpli
city. " When I offered to your sister to keep company, and to
be asked in church at such times as she was willing and ready
to come to the forge, I said to her, 'And bring the poor little
child. God bless the poor little child,' I said to your sister,
' there's room for him at the forge 1' "
I broke out crying and begging pardon, and hugged Joe
round the neck; who dropped the poker to hug me, and to say,
"Ever the best of friends; an't us, Pip? Don't cry, old
chap 1"
When this little interruption was over, Joe resumed :
" Well, you see, Pip, and here we are ! That's about where
it lights ; here we are 1 Now, when you take me in hand in my
learning, Pip (and I tell you beforehand I am awful dull, most
awful dull), Airs. Joe mustn't see too much of what we're up
to. It must be done, as I may say, on the sly. And why on
the sly ? I'll tell you why, Pip."
He had taken up the poker again, without which, I doubt if
he could have proceeded in his demonstration.
"Your sister is given to government."
" Given to government, Joe ?" I was startled, for I had some
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. S9
shadowy idea (and I am afraid I must add, hope) that Joe had
divorced her in favor of the Lords of the Admiralty, or Trea
sury.
" Given to government," said Joe. " Which I meantersay
the government of you and myself."
" Oh 1"
"And she an't over partial to having scholars on the pre
mises," Joe continued, "and in partikler would not be over
partial to my being a scholar, for fear as I might rise. Like a
sort of rebel, don't you see ?"
I was going to retort with an inquiry, and had got so far as
" Why—" when Joe stopped me.
" Stay a bit. I know what you're going to say, Pip ; stay
a bit ! I don't deny that your sister comes the Mogul over us,
now and again. I don't deny that she do throw us falls, and
that she do drop down upon us heavy. At such times as your
sister is on the Ram-page, Pip," Joe sank his voice to a whisper
and glanced at the door, " candor compels fur to admit that
she is a Buster."
Joe pronounced this word as if it began with at least twelve
capital Bs.
" Why don't I rise ? That were your observation when I
broke it off, Pip ?"
" Yes, Joe."
" Well," said Joe, passing the poker into his left hand, that
he might feel his whisker ; and I had no hope of him when he
took to that placid occupation ; " your sister's a master-mind.
A master-mind."
" What's that?" I asked, in some hope of bringing him to a
stand. But Joe was readier with his definition than I had ex
pected, and completely stopped me by arguing circularly and
answering with a fixed look, " Her."
"And I an't a master-mind," Joe resumed, when he had un
fixed his look, and got back to his whisker. "And last of all,
Pip—and this I want to say very serous to you, old chap—I
see so much in my poor mother of a woman drudging, and slav
ing, and breaking her honest heart, and never (retting no peace
in her mortal days, that I'm dead afeerd of going wrong in the
way of not doing what's right by a woman, and I'd far rathe:
70 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
of the two go wrong the t'other way, and be a little ill-conwenienced
myself. I wish it was only me that got put out, Pip ;
I wish there warn't no Tickler for you, old chap ; I wish I could
cake it all on myself ; but this is the up-and-down-and-straight
on it, Pip, and I hope you'll overlook short-comings."
Young as I was, I believe that I dated a new admiration of
Joe from that night. We were equals afterward, as we had been
before ; but afterward at quiet times, when I sat looking at Joe
and thinking about him, I had a new sensation of feeling con
scious that I was looking up to Joe in my heart.
" However," said Joe, rising to replenish the fire, "here's the
Dutch-clock a working himself up to being equal to striking
Eight of 'em, and she's not come home yet I I hope Uncle Pumblechook's
mare mayn't have set a forefoot on a piece o' ice,
and gone down."
Mrs. Joe made occasional trips with Uncle Pumblechook on
market days, to assist him in buying such household stuffs and
goods as required a woman's judgment ; Uncle Pumblechook
being a bachelor and reposing no confidences in his domestic
servant. This was market-day, and Mrs. Joe was out on one
of these expeditions.
Joe made the fire and swept the hearth, and then we went
out to listen for the chaise-cart. It was a dry, cold night, and
the wind blew keenly, and the frost was white and hard. A
man would die to-night of lying out on the marshes, I thought ;
and then I looked at the stars, and considered how awful it
would be for a man to turn his face up to them as he froze to
death, and see no help or pity in the whole glittering multitude.
" Here comes the mare," said Joe, "ringing like bells 1"
The sound of her iron shoes upon the hard road was quite mu
sical, as she came along at a much brisker trot than usual. We
got a chair out ready for Mrs. Joe's alighting, and stirred up
the fire that they might see a bright window, and took a final
survey of the kitchen that nothing might be out of its place.
When we had completed these preparations they drove up,
wrapped to the eyes. Mrs. Joe was soon landed, and Uncle
Pumblechook was soon down covering the mare with a cloth,
and we were soon all in the kitchen, carrying so much cold air
in with us that it seemed to drive all the heat out of the fire.
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 71
"Now," said Mrs. Joe, unwrapping herself with haste and
excitement, and throwing her bonnet back on her shoulders where it hung by the strings, "if this boy an't grateful this
night, he never will be 1"
I looked as grateful as any boy possibly could who was
wholly uninformed why he ought to assume that expression.
" It's only to be hoped," said my sister, " that he won't be
Pompeyed. But I have my fears."
" She an't in that line, mum," said Mr. Pumblechook. " She
knows better."
She ? I looked at Joe, making the motion with my lips and
eyebrows, " She " Joe looked at me, making the motion with
his lips and eyebrows, " She 1" My sister catching him in the
act, he drew the back of his hand across his nose with his usual
conciliatory air on such occasions, and looked at her.
" Well ?" said my sister in her snappish way. " Is the house
a-fire ?"
—" Which some individual," Joe politely hinted, "mentioned
—she."
"And she is a she, I suppose?" said my sister. "Unless
you call Miss Havisham a he. And I doubt if even you'll go
so far as that."
" Miss Havisham, up town ?" said Joe.
" Is there any Miss Havisham down town ?" returned my
sister. " She wants this boy to go and play there. And of
course he's going. And he had better play there," said my sis
ter, shaking her head at me as an encouragement to be extremely
light and sportive, "or I'll work him."
I had heard of Miss Havisham up town—every body for miles
round had heard of Miss Havisham up town—as an immensely
rich and grim old lady, who lived in a large and dismal house
barricaded against robbers, and who led a life of seclusion.
"Well to be sure 1" said Joe, astounded. "I wonder how
she come to know Pip 1"
"Noodle 1" cried my sister. "Who said she knew him ?"
—"Which some individual," Joe again politely hinted, "men
tioned that she wanted him to go and play there."
"And couldn't she ask Uncle Pumblechook if he knew of a
boy to go and play there ? Isn't it just barely possible that
72 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
Uncle Pumblechook may be a tenant of hers, and that he may
sometimes—we won't say quarterly or half-yearly, for that
would be requiring too much of you—but sometimes—go there
to pay his rent ? And couldn't she then ask Uncle Pumblechook
if he knew of a boy to go and play there ? And couldn't
Uncle Pumblechook, being always considerate and thoughtful
for us—though you may not think it, Joseph," in a tone of the
deepest reproach, as if he were the most callous of nephews,
" then mention this boy, standing Prancing here"—which I
solemnly declare I was not doing—" that I have for ever been
a willing slave to ?"
" Good again 1" cried Uncle Pumblechook. " Well put 1
Prettily pointed 1 Good indeed 1 Now Joseph, you know the
case."
" No, Joseph," said my sister, still in a reproachful manner,
while Joe apologetically drew the back of his hand across and
across his nose, "you do not yet—though you may not think it
.—know the case. You may consider that you do, but you do
not, Joseph. For you do not know that Uncle Pumblechook,
being sensible that for any thing we can tell this boy's fortune
may be made by his going to Miss Havisham's, has offered to
take him into town to-night in his own chaise-cart, and to keep
him to-night, and to take him with his own hands to Miss
Havisham's to-morrow morning. And Lor-a-mussy me!" cried
my sister, casting off her bonnet in sudden desperation, " here
I stand talking to mere Mooncalfs, with Uncle Pumblechook
waiting, and the mare catching cold at the door, and the boy
grimed with crock and dirt from the hair of his head to the sole
of his fool 1"
With that she pounced upon me, like an eagle on a lamb,
and my face was forced into wooden bowls in sinks, and my
head was put under taps of water-butts, and I was soaped, and
kneaded, and toweled, and thumped, and harrowed, and rasped,
until I really was quite beside myself. (I may here remark
that I conceive myself to be better acquainted than any living
authority with the ridgy effect of a wedding-ring, passing unsympathetically
over the human countenance).
When my ablutions were completed, I was put into clean
linen of the stiffest character, like a young penitent in sock
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 73
cloth, and was trussed up in my tightest and fearfulest suit. I
was then delivered over to Mr. Pumblechook, who formally re
ceived me as if he were the Sheriff, and who let off upon me the
speech which I knew he had been dying to make all along ;
" Boy, be forever grateful to all friends, but especially to them
which brought you up by hand 1"
" Good-by, Joe 1"
" God bless you, Pip, old chap 1"
I had never parted from him before, and what with my feel
ings and what with soap-suds I could at first see no stars from
the chaise-cart. But they twinkled out one by one, without
throwing any light on the questions why on earth I was going
to play at Miss Havisham's, and what on earth I was expected
to play at.
CHAPTER VIII.
Mr. Pumblechook's premises in the High street of the mar
ket town were of a pepper-corny and farinaceous character, as
the premises of a corn chandler and seedsman should be. It
appeared to me that he must be a very happy man indeed to
have so many little drawers in his shop ; and I wondered when
I peeped into one or two on the lower tiers, and saw the tiedup
brown paper packages inside, whether the flower-seeds and
bulbs ever wanted of a fine day to break out of those jails and
bloom.
It was in the early morning after my arrival that I entertained
this speculation. On the previous night I had been sent
straight to bed in an attic with a sloping roof, which was so
low in the corner where the bedstead was that I calculated the
tiles as being within a foot of my eyebrows. In the same early
morning I discovered a singular affinity between seeds and
corduroys. Mr. Pumblechook wore corduroys, and so did his
shopman ; and somehow there was a general air and flavor about
the corduroys, so much in the nature of seeds, and a general
air and flavor about the seeds, so much in the nature of
corduroys, that I hardly knew which was which. The same
opportunity served me for noticing that Mr. Pumblechook
appeared to conduct his business by looking across the street
at the saddler, who appeared to transact his business by keep
ing his eye on the coachmaker, who appeared to get on in life
by putting his hands in his pockets and contemplating the baker,
who in his turn folded his arms and stared at the grocer, who
stood at his door and yawned at the chemist. The watch
maker, always poring over a little desk with a magnifying glass
at his eye, and always inspected by a group in smock-frocks
poring over him through the glass of his shop-window, seemed
to be about the only person in the High Street whose trade
engaged his attention.
(U)
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 7S
Mr. Pumblechook and I breakfasted at eight o'clock in the
parlor behind the shop, while the shopman took his mug of tea
and hunch of bread-and-butter on a sack of pease in the front
premises. I considered Mr. Pumblechook wretched company
Besides being possessed by my sister's idea that a mortifying
and penitential character ought to be imparted to my diet—
besides giving me as much crumb as possible in combination with as little butter, and putting such a quantity of warm water
into my milk that it would have been more candid to have left
the milk out altogether—his conversation consisted of nothing
but arithmetic. On my politely bidding him Good-morning, he
said, pompously, " Seven times nine, boy 1" And how should
I be able to answer, dodged in that way, in a strange place,
on an empty stomach 1 I was hungry, but before I had
swallowed a morsel he began a running sum that lasted all
through the breakfast. " Seven ?" " And four " " And eight ?"
"And six?" "And two?" "And ten?" And so on. And
after each figure was disposed of, it was as much as I could
do to get a bite or a sup before the next came ; while he sat
at his ease guessing nothing and eating bacon and hot roll in
(if I may be allowed the expression) a gorging and gormandiz
ing manner. For such reasons I was very glad when ten o'clock came and
we started for Miss Havisham's; though I was not at all at my
ease regarding the manner in which I should acquaint myself
under that lady's roof. Within a quarter of an hour we came
to Miss Havisham's house, which was of old brick, and dismal,
and had a great many iron bars to it. Some of the windows
had been walled up ; of those that remained all the lower
were rustily barred, There was a court-yard in front, and that
was barred ; so we had to wait, after ringing the bell, until
some one should come to open it. While we waited at the
gate I peeped in (even then Mr. Pumblechook said, "And
fourteen ?" but I pretended not to hear him), and saw that at
the side of the house there was a large brewery ; no brewing
was going on in it, and none seemed to have gone on for a long
long time.
A window was raised, and a clear voice demanded " What
name?" To which my conductor replied "Pumblechook."'
76 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
The voice returned " Quite right," and the window was shut
again, and a young lady came across the court-yard with keys
in her hand.
"This," said Mr. Pumblechook, " is Pip."
" This is Pip, is it ?" returned the young lady, who was
very pretty and seemed very proud; " Come in, Pip."
Mr. Pumblechook was coming in also, when she stopped
him with the gate.
" Oh 1" she said. " Did you wish to see Miss Havisham ?"
" If Miss Havisham wishes to see me," returned Mr. Pumble
chook, discomfited.
"Ah 1" said the girl ; " but you see she don't."
She said it so finally, and in such an undiscussible way, that
Mr. Pumblechook, though in a condition of ruffled dignity,
could not protest. But he eyed me severely—as if I had done
any thing to him 1 —and departed with the words reproachfully
delivered: "Boy 1 Let your behavior here be a credit unto
them which brought you up by hand !" I was not free from
apprehension that he would come back to propound through the
gate, "And sixteen ?" But he didn't.
My young conductress locked the gate, and we went across
the court-yard. It was paved and clean, but grass was grow
ing in every crevice. The brewery buildings had a little lane
of communication with it, and the wooden gates of that lane
stood open, and all the brewery beyond stood open, away to the
high enclosing wall, and all was empty and disused. The cold
wind seemed to blow colder there than outside the gate, and it
made a shrill noise in howling in and out at the open side of
the brewery, like the noise of wind in the rigging of a ship at sea.
She saw me looking at it, and she said, " You could drink
without hurt all the strong beer that's brewed there now, boy.'
" I should think I could, miss," said I, in a shy way.
" Better not try to brew beer there now, or it would turn out
sour, boy ; don't you think so ?"
"It looks like it, miss."
" Not that any body means to try," she added, " for that's
all done with, and the place will stand as idle as it is till it
falls. As to strong beer, there's enough of it in the cellars
already to drown the Manor House."
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 11
" Is that the name of this house, miss ? "
" One of its names, boy."
" It has more than one, then, miss ?"
"One more. Its other name was Satis; which is Greek, or
Latin, or Hebrew, or all three—or all one to me—for enough."
" Enough House," said I ; " that's a curious name, miss."
"Yes," she replied; "but it meant more than it said. It
meant, when it was given, that whoever had this house could
want nothing else. They must have been easily satisfied in
those days, I should think. But don't loiter, boy."
Though she called me " boy" so often, and with a carelessness
that was far from complimentary, she was of about my own age
—or very little older. She seemed much older than I, of course,
being a girl, and beautiful and self-possessed : and she was
as scornful of me as if she had been one-and-twenty, and a
queen.
We went into the house by a side door—the great front
entrance had two chains across it outside—and the first thing
I noticed was, that the passages were all dark, and that she
had left a candle burning there. She took it up, and we went
through more passages and up a staircase, and still it was all
dark, and only the candle lighted us.
At last we came to the door of a room, and she said,
"Go in." I answered, more in shyness than politeness, " After you,
miss." To this, she returned : " Don't be ridiculous, boy ; I am
not going in." And scornfully walked away, and—what was
worse—took the candle with her. This was very uncomfortable, and I was half afraid. How
ever, the only thing to be done being to knock at the door, I
knocked, and was told from within to enter. I entered, there
fore, and found myself in a pretty large room well lighted
with wax candles. No glimpse of daylight was to be seen in it.
It was a dressing-room, as I supposed from the furniture,
though much of it was of forms and uses then quite unknown
to me. But prominent in it was a draped table with a gilded
looking-glass, and that I made out at first sight to be a fine
lady's dressing-table .
78 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
Whether I should have made out this object so soon if there
had been no fine lady sitting at it I cannot say. In an arm
chair, with an elbow resting on the table and her head leaning
on that hand, sat the strangest lady I have ever seen, or shall
ever see.
She was dressed in rich materials—satins, and lace, and silks
—all of white. Her shoes were white. And she had a long
white vail dependent from her hair, and she had bridal flowers
in her hair, but her hair was white. Some bright jewels sparkled
on her neck and on her hands, and some other jewels lay
sparkling on the table. Dresses, less splendid than the dress
she wore, and half-packed trunks, were scattered about. She
had not quite finished dressing, for she had but one shoe on—.
the other was on the table near her hand—her vail was but half
arranged, her watch and chain were not put on, and some lace
for her bosom lay with those trinkets, and with her handker
chief, and gloves, and some flowers, and a prayer-book, all con
fusedly heaped about the looking-glass.
It was not in the first minute that I saw all these thintrs,
though I saw more of them in the first minute than might be
supposed. But I saw that every thing within my view which
ought to be white had been white long ago, and had lost its
lustre, and was faded and yellow. I saw that the bride within
the bridal dress had withered like the dress, and like the flowers,
and had no brightness left but the brightness of her sunken eyes.
I saw that the dress had been put upon the rounded figure of
a young woman, and that the figure upon which it now hung
loose had shrunk to skin and bone. Once, I had been taken
to see some ghastly wax-work at the Fair, representing I know
not what impossible personage lying in state. Once, I had
been taken to one of our old marsh churches to see a skeleton
in the ashes of a rich dress that had been dug out of a vault
under the church pavement. Now, wax-work and skeleton seemed to have dark eyes that moved and looked at me. I sho-uld
have cried out if I could.
"Who is it?" said the lady at the table.
" Pip, ma'am."
"Pip "
" Mr. Pumblechook's boy, ma'am. Come—to play."

"WHO IS IT?" SAID THE LADY AT THE TABLE. "PIP, MA'AM."

GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 79
"Come nearer; let me look at you. Come close."
It was when I stood before her, avoiding her eyes, that I
took note of the surrounding objects in detail, and saw that
her watch had stopped at twenty minutes to nine, and that a
clock in the room had stopped at twenty minutes to nine. '• Look at me," said Miss Havisham. " You are not afraid
of a woman who has never seen the sun since you were born ?"
I regret to state that I was not afraid of telling the enormous
lie comprehended in the answer,
"No."
" Do you know what I touch here J" she said, laying her
hands, one upon the other, on her left side.
" Yes, ma'am." (It made me think of the young man.)
" What do I touch ?"
" Your heart."
" Broken 1"
She uttered the word with an eager look, and with strong
emphasis, and with a weird smile that had a kind of boast in
it. Afterward, she kept her hands there for a little while, and
slowly took them away as if they were heavy.
" I am tired," said Miss Havisham. " I want diversion, and
I have done with men and women. Piny 1"
I think it will be conceded by my most disputatious reader
that she could hardly have directed an unfortunate boy to do
any thing in the wide world more difficult to be done under
the circumstances.
" I sometimes have sick fancies," she went on, " and I have a
sick fancy that I want to see some play. There, there !" with an
impatient movement of the fingers of her right hand; "play,
play, play !"
For a moment, with the fear of my sister's working me
before my eyes, I had a desperate idea of starting round the
room in the assumed character of Mr. Pumblechook's chaisecart.
But I felt myself so unequal to the performance that I
gave it up, and stood looking at Miss Havisham in what I sup
pose she took for a dogged manner, inasmuch as she said, when
we had taken a good look at each other :
" Are you sullen and obstinate ?"
" No, ma'am, I am very sorry for you, and very sorry I cant
80 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
play just now. If you complain of me I shall get into trouble
with my sister, so I would do it if I could ; but it's so new
here, and so strange, and so fine—and melancholy—" I stopped,
fearing I might say too much, or had already said it, and we
took another look at each other.
Before she spoke again she turned her eyes from me and
looked at the dress she wore, and at the dressing-table, and
finally at herself in the looking-glass.
" So new to him," she muttered, " so old to me ; so strange
to him, so familiar to me ; so melancholy to both of us 1 Call
Estella."
As she was still looking at the reflection of herself, I thought
she was still talking to herself, and kept quiet.
" Call Estella," she repeated, flashing a look at me. "You
can do that. Call Estella. At the door."
To stand in the dark in a mysterious passage of an unknown
house bawling Estella to a scornful young lady neither visible
nor responsive, and feeling it a dreadful liberty so to roar out
her name, was almost as bad as playing to order. But she
answered at last, and her light came along the long dark pas
sage like a star.
Miss Havisham beckoned her to come close, and took up a
jewel from the table, and tried its effect upon her fair young
bosom and against her pretty brown hair. " Your own, one
day, my dear, and you will use it well. Let me see you play
cards with this boy."
" With this boy 1 Why, he is a common laboring boy 1"
I thought I overheard Miss Havisham answer—only it seemed
so unlikely—"Well ? You can break his heart."
" What do you play, boy ?" asked Estella of myself, with the
greatest disdain.
" Nothing but beggar my neighbor, miss."
"Beggar him," said Miss Havisham to Estella. So we sat
down to cards.
It was then I began to understand that every thing in the
room had stopped, like the watch and the clock, a long time
ago. I noticed that Miss Havisham put down the jewel
exactly on the spot from which she had taken it up. As
Estella dealt the cards I glanced at the dressing-table again,
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 81
and saw that the shoe upon it, once white, now yellow, had
never been worn. I glanced down at the foot from which the
shoe was absent, and saw that the silk stocking on it, once
white, now yellow, had been trodden ragged. Without this
arrest of every thing, this standing still of all the pale decayed
objects, not even the withered bridal dress on the collapsed form
could have looked so like grave-clothes, or the long vail so
like a shroud.
So she sat corpse-like, as we played at cards : the frillings
and trimmings on her bridal dress looking like earthy paper,
as if they would crumble under a touch. I knew nothing
then of the discoveries that are occasionally made of bodies
buried in ancient times, which fall to powder in the moment of
being distinctly seen ; but I have often thought since that she
must have looked as if the admission of the natural light of day
would have struck her to dust. •'He calls the knaves Jacks, this boy?" said Estella, with
disdain, before our first game was out. " And what coarse
hands he has 1 And what thick boots 1"
I had never thought of being ashamed of my hands before ;
but I began to consider them a very indifferent pair. Her contetnpt
was so strong that it became infectious, and I caught it.
She won the game, and I dealt. I misdealt, as was only
natural, when I knew she was lying in wait for me to do
wrong, and she denounced me for a stupid, clumsy laboring boy.
" You say nothing of her," remarked Miss Havisham to me as
she looked on. " She says many hard things of you, but you
say nothing of her. What do you think of her?"
" I don't like to say," I stammered.
" Tell me in my ear," said Miss Havisham, bending down.
" I think she is very proud," I replied, in a whisper.
" Any thing else ?"
" I think she is very pretty."
" Any thing else?"
" I think she is very insulting." (She was looking at me, then,
with a look of supreme aversion.)
" Any thing else ?"
" I think I should like to go home,"
" And never see her again, though she is so pretty P
5
82 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
" I am not sure that I should not like to see her again, but I
should like to go home now."
" You shall go soon," said Miss Havisham, aloud. " Play
the game out." Saving for the one weird smile at first, I
should have felt almost sure that Miss Havisham's face could
not smile. It had dropped into a watchful and brooding
expression—most likely when all the things about her had
become transfixed—and it looked as if nothing could ever lift
it up any more. Her chest had dropped, so that she stooped ;
and her voice had dropped, so that she spoke low, and with a
dead lull upon her; altogether she had the appearance of
having dropped, body and soul, within and without, under the
weight of a crushing blow.
I played the game to an end with Estella, and she beggared
me. She threw the cards down on the table when she had won
them all, as if she despised them for having been won of me.
"When shall I have you here again ?" said Miss Havisham.
"Let me think."
I was beginning to remind her that to-day was Wednesday,
when she checked me with her former impatient movement of
the fingers of her right hand.
" There, there ! I know nothing of days of the week ; I
know nothing of weeks of the year. Come again after three
days. You hear ?"
"Yes, ma'am."
"Estella, take him down. Let him have something to eat,
and let him roam and look about him while he eats it. Go,
Pip."
I followed the candle down as I had followed the candle up,
and she stood it in the place where we had found it. Until
she opened the side entrance I had fancied, without thinking about it, that it must necessarily be night time. The rush of
the daylight quite confounded me, and made me feel as if I
had been in the candle-light of the strange room many hours.
" You are to wait here, you boy," said Estella, and disappeared
and closed the door.
I took the opportunity of being alone in the court-yard to
look at my coarse hands and my common boots. My opinion
of those accessories was not favorable. They had never troubled
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 83
me before, but they troubled me now, as vulgar appendages. I
determined to ask Joe why he had ever taught me to call those
picture-cards Jacks which ought to be called knaves. I wished
Joe had been rather more genteelly brought up, and then I
should have been so too.
She came back with some bread and meat and a little mug
of beer. She put the mug down on the stones of the yard,
and gave me the bread and meat without looking at me, as
insolently as if I were a dog. I was so humiliated, hurt, spurned,
offended, angry, sorry—I can not hit upon the right name for
the smart—God knows what its name was—that tears started
to my eyes. The moment they sprang there the girl looked
at me with a quick delight in having been the cause of them.
It gave me power to force them back and to look at her ; so
she gave a contemptuous toss—but with a sense, I thought,
of having made too sure that I was so wounded—and
left me.
But when she was gone I looked about me for a place
to hide my face in, and got behind one of the gates in the
brewery-lane, and leaned my sleeve against the wall there, and
leaned my forehead on it and cried. As I cried I kicked the
wall and took a hard twist at my hair; so bitter were my
feelings, and so sharp was the smart without a name, that
needed counteraction.
My sister's bringing up had made me sensitive. In the little
world in which children have their existence, whosoever brings
them up, I am convinced there is nothing so finely perceived
and so finely felt as injustice. It may be only small injustice
that the child can be exposed to ; but the child is small, and
its world is small, and its rocking-horse stands as many hands
high, according to scale, as a big-boned Irish hunter. Within
myself I had sustained from my babyhood a perpetual conflict
with injustice. I had known from the time when I could speak
that my sister, in her capricious and violent coercion, was
unjust to me. I had cherished a profound conviction that her
bringing me up by hand gave her no right to bring me up by
jerks. Through all my punishments, disgraces, fasts, and
vigils, and other penitential performances, I had nursed this
assurance ; and to my communing so much with it, in a soli
GREAT EXPECTATIONS
tary and unprotected way, I, in great part, refer the fact that
I was morally timid and very sensitive.
I got rid of my injured feelings for the time by kicking them
into the brewery wall, and twisting them out of my hair, and
then I smoothed my face with my sleeve and came from behind
the gate. The bread and meat were acceptable, and the beer
was warming and tingling, and I was soon in spirits to look
about me.
To be sure it was a deserted place, down to the pigeonhouse
in the brewery-yard, which had been blown crooked on
its pole by some high wind, and would have made the pigeons
think themselves at sea, if there had been any pigeons there to
be rocked by it. But there were no pigeons in the dove-cot,
no horses in the stable, no pigs in the sty, no malt in the store
house, no smells of grains and beer in the copper or the vat.
All the uses and scents of the brewery might have evaporated
with its last reek of smoke. In a by-yard there was a wilder
ness of empty casks, which had a certain sour remembrance
of better days lingering about them ; but it was too sour to be
accepted as a sample of the beer that was gone—and in
this respect I remember those recluses as being like most
others.
Behind the farthest end of the brewery was a rank garden
with an old red wall : not so high but that I could struggle up
and hold on long enough to look over it, and see that the rank
garden was the garden of the house, and that it was overgrown
with tangled weeds, but that there was a track upon the green
and yellow paths, as if some one sometimes walked there, and
that Estella was walking away from me even then. But she
seemed to be every where. For when I yielded to the tempta
tion presented by the casks, and began to walk on them, I saw
her walking on them at the end of the yard of casks. She had
her back to me, and held her pretty brown hair spread out in
her two hands, and never looked round, and passed out of my
view directly. So in the brewery itself—by which I mean the
large paved lofty place in which they used to make the beer, and
where the brewing utensils still were. When I first went into
it, and, rather oppressed by its gloom, stood near the door look
ing about me, I saw her pass among the extinguished fires, and
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 80
ascend some light iron stairs, and go out by an iron gallery
high overhead, as if she were going oat into the sky.
It was in this place, and at this moment, that a strange thing
happened to my fan y. I thought it a strange thing then, and
I thought it stranger long afterward. I turned my eyes—a
little dimmed by looking up at the frosty light—toward a great
wooden beam in a low nook of the building near me on my right
hand, and I saw a figure hanging there by the neck. A figure
all in yellow white, with but one shoe to the feet; and it hung
so that I could see that the faded trimmings of the dress were
like earthy paper, and that the face was Miss Havisham's with
the eyes open, and with a movement going over the whole
countenance as if she were trying to call to me. In the terror
of seeing the figure, and in the terror of being certain that it
bad not been there a moment before, I at first ran from it, and
then ran toward it. And my terror was greatest of all when I
found no figure there.
Nothing less than the frosty light of the cheerful sky, the
sight of people passing beyond the bars of the court-yard gate,,
and the reviving influence of the rest of the bread and meat and
beer, would have brought me round. Even with those aids I
might not have come to myself as soon as I did, but that I
saw Estella approaching with the keys to let me out. She
would have some fair reason for looking down upon me, I
thought, if she saw me frightened ; and she should have no fair
reason.
She gave me a triumphant glance in passing me, as if she
rejoiced that my hands were so coarse and my boots were so
thick, and she opened the gate and stood holding it. I was
passing out without looking at her, when she touched me with
a taunting hand.
"Why don't you cry ?" said she.
" Because I don't want to," said I.
" You do," said she. " You have been crying, and you are
near crying again."
She laughed contemptuously, pushed me out, and locked the
gate upon me. I went straight to Mr. Pumblechook's, and was
immensely relieved to find him not at home. So leaving word
with the shopman on what day I was wanted at Miss Havi
86 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
sham's again, I set off on the four-mile walk to our forge;
pondering, as I went along, on all I had seen, and deeply re
volving that I was a common laboring boy, that my hands were
coarse, that my boots were thick, that I had fallen into a
despicable habit of calling knaves Jacks, that I was much more
ignorant than I had considered myself last night, and, on the
wiiole, that I was in a low-lived bad way.
CHAPTER IX.
When I reached home my sister was very curious to know aD
about Miss Havisham's, and asked a number of questions
And I soon found myself getting heavily bumped in the nape
of the neck and the small of the back, and having my face
ignominiously shoved against the kitchen wall, because I did
not answer those questions at sufficient length.
If a dread of not being understood be hidden in the breasts
of other young people to any thing like the extent to which it
used to be hidden in mine—which I consider probable, as I
have no particular reason to suspect myself of having been a
monstrosity—it is the key to many reservations. I felt con
vinced that if I described Miss Havisham's as my eyes had
seen it, I should not be understood. Not only that, but I felt
convinced that Miss Havisham too would not be understood ;
and although she was perfectly incomprehensible to me, I en
tertained an impression that there would be something coarse
and treacherous in my dragging her (to say nothing of Miss
Estella) before the contemplation of Mrs. Joe. Consequently,
I said as little as I could, and had my face shoved against the
kitchen wall.
The worst of it was that that bullying old Pumblechook,
preyed upon by a devouring curiosity to be informed of all I
had seen and heard, came gaping over in his chaise-cart at teatime
to have the details divulged to him. And the mere sight
of the torment, with his fishy eyes and mouth open, his sandy
hair inquisitively on end, and his waistcoat heaving with windy
arithmetic, made me vicious in my reticence.
" Well, boy," Uncle Pumblechook began, as soon as he was
seated in the chair of honor by the fire. " How did you get on
up town ?"
I answered, " Pretty well, Sir," and my sister shook her fist
at me. (87)
88 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
" Pretty well ?" Mr. Pumblechook repeated. " Pretty well
is no answer. Tell us what you mean by pretty well, boy t"
Whitewash on the forehead hardens the brain into a state of
obstinacy, perhaps. Any how, with whitewash from the wall
on my forehead, my obstinacy was adamantine. I reflected for
sometime, and then answered, " I mean pretty well."
My sister, with an explanation of impatience, was going to
fly at me—I had no shadow of defense, for Joe was busy in the
forge—when Mr. Pumblechook interposed with, " No 1 Don't
lose your temper. Leave this lad to me, ma'am ; leave this lad
to me." Mr. Pumblechook then turned me toward him, as if
he were going to cut my hair or take out one of my teeth, or
perform some such operation, and said :
" First (to get our thoughts in order) : Forty-three pence "
I calculated the consequences of replying "Four Hundred
Pound," and, finding them against me, went as near the answer
as I could—which was somewhat about eight pence off. Mr.
Pumblechook then put me through my pence-table from "twelve
pence make one shilling," up to "forty pence make three-andfour
pence," and then triumphantly demanded, as if he had done
for me, "Now! How much is forty-three pence?" To
which I replied, after a long interval of reflection, " I don't
know." And I was so aggravated that I almost doubt if I did
know.
Mr Pumblechook worked his head like a screw to screw it out of me, and said, " Is forty-three pence seven and sixpence
three fardens, for instance "
"Yes !" said I. And although my sister instantly boxed my
ears, it was highly gratifying to me to see that the answer spoilt
his joke, and brought him to a dead stop.
"Boy 1 What like is Miss Havisham ?" Mr. Pumblechook
began again when he had recovered ; folding his arms tight on
his chest and applying the screw.
" Very tall and dark," I told him.
" Is she, uncle ?" asked my sister.
Mr. Pumblechook winked assent; from which I at once in
ferred that he had never seen Miss Havisham, for she was no
thing of the kind.
" Good " said Mr. Pumblechook, conceitedly. " This is the
GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 89
way to have him I We are beginning to hold our own, I think,
Mum "
" I am sure, uncle," returned Mrs. Joe, " I wish you had him
always; you know so well how to deal with him."
"Now, boy 1 What was she a doing of when you went in
to-day ?" asked Mr. Pumblechook.
"She was sitting," I answered, " in a black velvet coach."
Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe stared at one another—as
they well might—and both repeated, "In a black velvet
coach ?"
"Yes," said I. "And Miss Estella—that's her niece, I
think—handed her in cake and wine at the coach window, on a
gold plate. And we all had cake and wine on gold plates.
And I got up behind the coach to eat mine, because she
told me to."
" Was any body else there ?" asked Mr. Pumblechook.
" Four dogs," said I.
" Large or small ?"
" Immense," said I. " And they fought for veal cutlets out
of a silver basket."
Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe stared at one another again,
in utter amazement. I was perfectly frantic—a reckless witness
under the torture—and would have told them any thing.
" Where was this coach, in the name of gracious?" asked
my sister.
"In Miss Havisham's room." They stared again. "But
there weren't any horses to it." I added this saving clause, in
the moment of rejecting four richly caparisoned coursers which
I had had wild thoughts of harnessing.
" Can this be possible, uncle ?" asked Mrs. Joe. " What can
the boy mean ?"
" I'll tell you, Mum," said Mr. Pumblechook. " My opinion
is, it's a sedan-chair. She's flighty, you know—very flighty—
quite flighty enough to pass her days in a sedan-chair."
" Did you ever see her in it, uncle ?" asked Mrs. Joe.
" How could I ?" he returned, forced to the admission, "when
I never see her in my life ? Never clapped eyes upon her ?"
" Goodness, uncle I And yet you have spoken to her ?"
"Why, don't you know," said Mr. Pumblechook, testily.
90 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
" that when I have been there I have been took up to the out.
side of her door, and the door has stood ajar, and she has
spoke to me that way. Don't say that you don't know that,
Mum. Howsoever, the boy went there to play. What did you
play at, boy 1"
" We played with flags," I said. (I beg to observe that I
think of myself with amazement, when I recall the lies I told on
this occasion.)
" Flags 1" echoed my sister.
"Yes," said I. "Estella waved a blue flag, and I waved a
red one, and Miss Havisham waved one sprinkled all over with
little gold stars, out at the coach window. And then we all
waved our swords and hurrahed."
" Swords 1" repeated my sister. "Where did you get swords
from ?"
" Out of a cupboard," said I. " And I saw pistols in it—and
jam—and pills. And there was no daylight in the room, but it
was all lighted up with candles."
" That's true. Mum," said Mr. Pumblechook, with a grave
nod. "That's the state of the case, for that much I've seen
myself." And then they both stared at me, and I with an
