82 GREAT EXPECTATIONS.
At such a time I found out for certain that this bleak place
overgrown with nettles was the church-yard ; and that Tobias
Pirrip, late of this Parish, and also Georgiana, wife of the
above, were dead and buried; and that Alexander, Barthol
omew, Abraham, George, and Robert, infant children of the
aforesaid, were also dead and buried ; and that the dark, flat
wilderness beyond the church-yard, intersected with dikes and
mounds and gates, with scattered cattle feeding on it, was the
marshes ; and that the low leaden line beyond was the river ;
and that the distant-savage lair from which the wind was rush
ing, was the sea ; and that the small bundle of shivers growing
afraid of it all and beginning to cry, was Pip.
" Hold your noise 1" cried a terrible voice, as a man started
up from among the graves at the side of the church-porch.
" Hold your noise, you little devil, or I'll cut your throat 1"
A fearful man, all in gray, with a great iron on his leg. A
man with no hat, and broken shoes, and with an old rag tied
round his head. A man who had been soaked in water and
smothered in mud, and lamed by stones, and cut by flints, and
stung by nettles, and torn by briers ; who limped, and shivered,
and glared, and growled ; and whose teeth chattered in his
head as he seized me by the chin.
"Don't cut my throat, Sir 1" I pleaded in terror. "Pray
don't do it, Sir 1"
" Tell us your name 1" said the man. " Quick 1"
"Pip, Sir."
" Once more," said the man. " Give it mouth 1"
"Pip. Pip, Sir."
"Show us where you live," said the man. "Pint out the
place 1"
I pointed to where our village lay on the flat in-shore among
the alder-trees and pollards, a mile or more from the church.
The man, after looking at me for a moment, turned me up
side-down, and emptied my pockets. There was nothing in
them but a piece of bread. When the church came to itself'—
for he was so sudden and strong that he made it go head over
heels before me, and I saw the steeple under my legs—when
the church came to itself, I say, I was seated on a high tomb
stone trembling, while he ate the bread ravenously.
 

